ACCORDING TO MATTHEW if you forgive people their offences, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
 15But if you do not forgive people their offences, neither will your Father forgive your offences.
 About fasting – Treasures in heaven – The light of the body 16Moreover, when you fast, do not be like the hypocrites with their gloomy faces.
 For they disfigure their faces so that people may see that they are fasting.
 Amen, I tell you: they have received their reward.
 17But you, when you fast, anoint your head and wash your face 18so that people may not see that you are fasting.
 Only your Father who is in secret will see, and your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.
 19Do not store up treasures for yourselves on the earth, where moth and rust consume and where thieves break in and steal.
 20Instead, store for yourselves treasures in heaven,a where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
 21For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
 22The lamp of the body is the eye! If therefore your eye is sound,b your whole body will be full of light.
 23But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness.
 If therefore the light that is in you is darkness, how great is the darkness! Two masters - Dependence on God’s providence 24No one can serve two masters.
 Either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he will be devoted to one and despise the other.
 You cannot serve both God and Mammon.
c 25Therefore, I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, wondering what you will eat or drink; or about your body, what you will wear.
 Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing? 26See the birds of the sky: they do not sow, or reap, or gather into barns.
 Your heavenly Father feeds them! Are you not of much more value than they? 27Which of you, by being anxious, can add one momentd to his lifespan? 28Why then are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow.
 They do not toil or spin, 29yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of these! 30But if God clothes the grass of the field which today exists and tomorrow is thrown into the oven in such as way, will he not much more clothe you, you of little faith? a The 1611 Authorized Version associates Sirach 29:11 with Matthew 6:20, Luke 11:41 and 12:33, Acts 10:4, and 1 Timothy 6:18, 19 in a marginal note.
 b Or “healthy” c Or “Money” d Literally, cubit THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 52 31Therefore, do not be anxious, saying: ‘What will we eat?,’ ‘What will we drink?’ or, ‘What will we wear?’ 32It is the Gentilesa who seek after all these things, but your heavenly Father knows that you need them all.
 33Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well.
 34Therefore, do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself.
 Each day has enough trouble of its own.
 7 Judging others – ‘Pearls offered to swine’ Do not judge in order not to be judged.
 2For in the same way that you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure that you use, it will be measured to you.
 3Why do you see the speck that is in someoneb else’s eye but do not consider the beam that is in your own eye? 4How can you tell someone,c ‘Let me remove the speck from your eye;’ and behold, there is a beam in your own eye? 5You hypocrite! First, remove the beam out of your own eye, and then you will be able to see clearly [so as] to remove the speck out of your brother’s eye.
 6Do not give what is holy to the dogs and do not throw your pearls before pigs, for fear that they might trample them under their feet, and then turn [against you] and tear you to pieces.
 Perseverance in prayer – The Golden Rule 7Ask, and it will be given you! Seek, and you will find! Knock, and it will be opened for you! 8Indeed, everyone who asks receives.
 Whoever seeks finds! To the one who knocks, it will be opened.
 9Who is there among you, who, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone? 10Or if he asks for a fish, who will give him a snake? 11If you then who are evil [still] know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him! 12Therefore, whatever you desire other people to do for you, you shall also do for them! This is the law and the prophets.
 13Enter by the narrow gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the wayd that leads to destruction, and many are those who enter by it.
 14Howe narrow is the gate, and how pressingf is the way that leads to life! Few are those who find it.
 a Or “nations, heathen, pagans” Greek “your brother” c Greek “your brother” d Or “road” – note that a few manuscripts and ancient writers read “wide and broad is the road” e TR reads “Because” instead of “How” f Or “hard, difficult” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ False prophets and true disciples 15Beware of false prophets who come to you in sheep’s clothing.
 Inwardly, they are ravenous wolves! 16You will recognize them by their fruits.
 Do you gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles? 17Likewise, every good tree produces good fruit, but the corrupt tree produces evil fruit.
 18A good tree cannot produce evil fruit, and neither can a corrupt tree produce good fruit.
 19Every tree that does not grow good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire.
 20Therefore, by their fruits you will recognizea them.
 21It is not everyone who tells me, ‘Lord, Lord’ who will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but the one who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.
 22Many will tell me in that Day, ‘Lord, Lord, did not we prophesy in your Name, cast out demons in your Name and do many deeds of power in your Name?’ 23Then I will tell them, ‘I never knew you! Depart from me, you who do what is wicked.
’b Foundations on rock or sand 24Everyone therefore who hears my words and does them, I will compare to a wise person who built his house on a rock.
c 25The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, beating hard on that house.
 Yet, it did not collapse, because it was founded on the rock.
 26But everyone who hears my words and does not do them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand.
 27The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, beating hard on that house; then it collapsed, and great was its downfall.
” 28It happened, when Jesus had finished saying these things, that the crowds were astonished at his teaching 29because he taught them with authority, not like the scribes.
 8 Healing of a leper When Jesus came down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
 2Behold, a leper came to him and expressed adoration tod him, saying, “Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean!” 3Jesus stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, “I want to! Be made clean.
” Immediately, this man’s leprosy was cleansed.
 4Jesus then said to him, “Do not tell anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.
” a Or “know” Or “you who work iniquity” c Compare Matthew 16:18 d proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 54 Healing of the centurion’s servant – The centurion’s faith 5When Jesus came into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking 6and saying, “Lord, my servant is lying in the house paralyzed, grievously tormented.
” 7Jesus answered, “I will come and heal him.
” 8But the centurion replied, “Lord, I am not worthy that you should come under my roof! Only say the word and my servant shall be healed.
 9For I am also a man under authority, having soldiers under my own authority.
 I tell this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and if I tell another, ‘Come,’ he comes.
 Or if I tell my servant, ‘Do this,’ he does it!” 10When Jesus heard this, he marveled and said to those who followed, “Amen, I tell you that I have never found so great a faith, not even in Israel! 11I tell you that many will come from the east and the west, and will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.
 12But the children of the Kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness and there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
” 13Jesus said to the centurion, “Go your way.
 Let it be done for you as you have believed.
” And his servant was healed in that hour.
 The healing of Peter’s mother in law and other healings 14When Jesus came into Peter’s house, he saw Peter’s mother-in-law lying sick with a fever.
 15He touched her hand, and the fever left her.
 She got up and served him.
a 16When evening came, many who were possessed with demons were brought to him.
 He cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick.
 17Thus, what had been spoken through Isaias (Isaiah) the prophet was fulfilled: He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.
b 18Now, when Jesus saw great crowds around him, he gave the order to depart to the other side.
 Requirements for discipleship – The calming of the storm 19A scribe came and said to him, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go!” 20Jesus replied, “The foxes have holes and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.
” 21Another of his disciples said to Jesus,c “Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.
” 22But Jesus replied, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their [own] dead.
” a TR reads “them” instead of “him” Isaias (Isaiah) 53:4 c Greek “him” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 23When he got into a boat, his disciples followed him.
 24Behold, a violent storm came up on the sea, so much that the waves swept over the boat, but Jesusa was asleep.
 25They came to him and woke him up, saying, “Save us, Lord! We are dying!” 26He said to them, “Why are you fearful, O you of little faith?” Then he stood up, rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great calm.
 27The men marveled, saying, “What kind of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?” The healing of the demoniacs - The expulsion of the demons into pigs 28When Jesusb arrived on the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes,c two men possessed by demons met him there, coming out of the tombs.
 They were extremely violent, so much that nobody could pass that way.
 29Behold, they cried out, saying, “What do we have to do with you, Jesus, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?” 30Now, there was a herd of many pigs feeding at some distance from them.
 31The demons begged him, saying, “If you cast us out, allow us to go away into the herd of pigs.
” 32He said to them, “Go!” The demonsd came out and went into the herd of pigs: and behold, the whole herd of pigs rushed down the cliff into the sea and died in the water.
 33Those who fed them fled and went into the city where they told everything, including what had happened to those who were possessed with demons.
 34Behold, the entire city came out to meet Jesus.
 When they saw him, they begged that he would depart from their borders.
 9 The healing of a paralytic Jesus entered into a boat, crossed over [the lake] and came into his own town.
 2Behold, some people brought him a man who was paralyzed, lying on a bed.
 Seeing their faith, Jesus said to the paralytic, “Son, be of good cheer! Your sins are forgiven!” 3At this, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This man blasphemes!” 4Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, “Why do you think evil [thoughts] in your hearts? 5Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven’ or, ‘Get up, a Greek “he” Greek “he” c CT reads “Gadarenes.
” This was an enclave where the Law was not observed.
 d Greek “they” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 56 and walk?’ 6But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins” (then he said to the paralytic), “Get up, take up your mat, and go up to your house.
” 7The man got up and departed to his house.
 8But when the crowds saw this, they were astonisheda and glorified God, who had given such authority to men.
 The calling of Matthew 9As Jesus was passing by from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax collection office.
 Jesus said to him, “Follow me,” and the man got up and began to follow him.
 10It so happened that as Jesus was sitting in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came [in] and sat down with Jesus and his disciples.
 11When the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?” 12When Jesus heard it, he told them, “Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do.
 13But go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,’b for I did not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
c” About fasting – The old and new 14Then, John’s disciples came to Jesus,d asking, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples do not fast?” 15Jesus said to them, “Can the friends of the bridegroom mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? The days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then, they will fast.
 16No one puts a piece of new cloth on an old garment because the patch would [shrink and] tear away from the garment, and a worse hole would be made.
 17Neither do people put new wine into old wineskins, or else the skins would burst, and the wine be spilled, and the skins ruined.
 No, they put new wine into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.
” The resurrection of a ruler’s daughter – The healing of a woman’s bleeding 18While he was saying these things to them, behold, a ruler came and expressed adoration toe him, saying, “My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live.
” a CT reads “afraid” Hosea 6:6.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT c CT omits “to repentance.
” d Greek “him” e proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo).
 In this context, it is obviously a profound b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 19Jesus got up and followed him, as did his disciples.
 20Behold, a woman who had had an issue of blood for twelve years came behind him and touched the fringea of his garment.
 21[She did this because] she said within herself, “If I only touch his garment, I will be made well.
” 22But Jesus, turning around and seeing her, said, “Daughter, rejoice! Your faith has made you well.
” And the woman was made well from that very hour.
 23When Jesus came into the ruler’s house, he saw the flute players and the crowd making a commotion.
 24He said to them, “Make room, because the girl is not dead, but sleeping,” and they started to ridicule him.
 25But when the crowd was put out, he entered in, took the girl by the hand and she arose.
 26The report of this spread into the entire region.
 The healing of two blind men and of a mute – The Lord’s compassion 27As Jesus passed by from there, two blind men followed him, calling out and saying, “Have mercy on us, son of David!” 28When he entered the house, the blind men came to him.
 Jesus asked them, “Do you believe that I am able to do this?” They replied, “Yes, Lord.
” 29He then touched their eyes, saying, “According to your faith, let it be done to you!” 30And their eyes were opened.
 Jesus strictly commanded them, saying, “See that no one knows about this.
” 31However, they went out and spread his fame throughout that entire land.
 32As they were leaving, behold, a mute man who was demon-possessed was brought to him.
 33When the demon was cast out, the mute began to speak.
 The multitudes marveled, saying, “Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!” 34But the Pharisees said, “It is by the prince of the demonsb that he casts out demons.
” 35Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the Good News of the Kingdom.
 He also healed every kind of disease and sickness among the people.
 36But when he saw the crowds, he was moved with compassion for them because they were distressed and scattered, like sheep without a shepherd.
 37He then said to his disciples, act of reverence (probably with prostration) but not necessarily an acknowledgment of Jesus as Christ and the divine king.
 a Or “tassel” b Some manuscripts read “by the authority of demons he casts out demons” and others (D) omit this verse altogether.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 58 “The harvest is plentiful indeed, but the workers are few! 38Pray therefore that the Lord of the harvest will send out workers into his harvest.
” 10 The commission of the Twelve Jesusa called to himself his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every kind of disease and sickness.
 2The names of the Twelve apostles are: first, Simon, who is called Peter; Andrew, his brother; James the son of Zebedee; John, his brother; 3Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; Matthew the tax collector; James [the son] of Alphaeus; Lebbaeus, the one calledb Thaddaeus;c 4Simon the Canaanite;d and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
 5Jesus sent these Twelve out and gave them this instruction, “Do not go among the Gentiles and do not enter into any city of the Samaritans.
 6Rather, go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
 7As you go, preach and say: ‘The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!’ 8Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the deade, and cast out demons.
 Freely you have received, give freely as well.
 9Do not take any gold, silver or brass in your money belts.
 10Do not take a bag for your journey, or two coats, or shoes, or staff: the one who works is worthy of his food.
 11As you enter any city or village, find out who is worthy and stay there until you go on.
 12As you enter into the household, greet it.
 13If the household is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
 14If some place does not receive you and does not hear your words, shake off the dust from your feet as you depart from that house or that city.
 15Amen, I tell you: in the day of judgment, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah than for that city.
 Persecutions – Sheep among wolves 16Behold, I send you out as sheep among wolves! Therefore, be wise as serpents, and yet innocent as doves.
 17But beware of men: they will hand you over to councils and in their synagogues, they will flog you.
 18Yes, you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, as witnesses to them and to the nations.
 19When they arrest you, do not worry about what you will say; what you are to say will be given you in that hour.
 20Indeed, it is not you who [shall] speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you.
 a Greek “he” CT omits “Lebbaeus, whose surname was” c Identified with Jude (Judas/Judah) [son of / brother of] James in Luke 6:16; Acts 1:13 d That is, “from Cana” – CT reads “the Zealot” (which is a similar but different Greek word) e MT and other ancient manuscripts (L, Θ) omit “raise the dead” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 21Brother will deliver up brother to death, and a father his child.
 Children will rise up against their parents and cause them to be put to death.
 22You will be hated by all for my Name’s sake, but the one who endures to the end will be saved.
 23Nevertheless, when they persecute you in this city, flee into the next.
 Amen, I tell you: you will not have finished going through the cities of Israel until the Son of Man comes.
a 24A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master.
 25It is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher and the servant like his lord.
 If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul,b how much more those of his household! 26Therefore, do not be afraid of them, for there is nothing covered that will not be revealed and nothing hidden that will not be known.
 27What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear whispered in the ear, proclaim on the housetops.
 28Do not be afraid of those who [can] kill the body but are not able to kill the soul.
 Rather, fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.
c 29Are not two sparrows sold for a small coind? Not one of them falls on the ground apart from your Father’s will, 30but the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
 31Therefore, do not be afraid! You are of more value than many sparrows! 32Whoever confesses me before men I will also confess before my Father who is in heaven.
 33But whoever denies me in front of others I will also deny before my Father who is in heaven.
 Not peace but the sword 34Do not think that I came to bring peace on the earth! I did not come to bring peace, but a sword.
 35Indeed, I came to set a son against his father, a daughter against her mother and a daughter-in-law against her mother-inlaw.
 36A man’s enemies will be memberse of his own household.
f Requirements for discipleship - Rewards 37Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
 38Whoever does not take his cross and follow after me is not worthy of me.
 39The one who savesg his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will obtain it.
 40Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.
 41Whoever receives a prophet a Widely believed to be a reference to Pentecost or the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD.
 See Matthew 12:24; Luke 11:15 c Or “hell” d An assarion was a small coin worth one tenth of a drachma or a sixteenth of a denarius.
 It was approximately the wages of one half hour of agricultural labor.
 e Or “people” f Micah 7:6 g Or “secures” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 60 because he is a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward.
 Whoever receives a righteous person because of this person’s righteousness will receive the reward of the righteous.
 42Amen, I tell you that whoever gives one of these little ones even just a cup of cold water to drink because he is a disciple will in no way lose his reward.
” 11 Message from John the Baptist – The Lord bears witness to John When Jesus had finished giving instructions to his twelve disciples, he left that place to teach and preach in their cities.
 2Now, when John heard about the works of Christ from his prison, he sent twoa of his disciples 3to ask him, “Are you the one who comes or should we look for another?” 4Jesus replied to them, “Go and tell John about the things you hear and see: blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear,b the dead are raised up and the poor have Good News preached to them.
c 6Blessed is he who finds no occasion for stumbling in me.
” 5the 7As they went their way, Jesus began to speak to the multitudes concerning John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? 8If not, what did you go out to see? A man in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in king’s houses!d 9Why then did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet! 10Indeed, he is the one of whom it is written: Behold, I send my messenger before your face,e who will prepare your way before you.
f 11Amen, I tell you: among those born of women, there has not arisen anyone greater than John the Baptizer! Yet the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he.
 12From the days of John the Baptizer until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violentg take it by force.
h 13For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John [came].
 14If you are willing to accept it, this [John] is Elias (Elijah) who was to come.
 15Let anyone with ears listen! a CT reads “he sent a message by way of his disciples” which has excellent manuscript support Isaias (Isaiah) 35:5 c Isaias (Isaiah) 61:1-4 d Or “palaces” e NT agrees with MT against LXX f Malachi 3:1 g Or perhaps “those who are eager” h Or “plunder it.
” Greek a`rpa,zousin.
 Parallel in Luke 16:16.
 See Matthew 12:29 b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 16But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces who call to their friends 17and say, ‘We played the flute for you and you did not dance.
 We mourned for you and you did not lament!’ 18As it is, John came neither eating nor drinking, and so they say, ‘He has a demon!’ 19The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and so they say, ‘Behold, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ Nevertheless, Wisdom is justified by her children!”a Woe on Chorazin and Bethsaida 20He then began to rebuke the cities in which most of his deeds of power had been done, because the peopleb did not repent.
 21“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the deeds of power which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes! 22But I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you! 23You, Capernaum, who [thought that you] were exalted to heaven, you will go down to hades! For if the deeds of power which were done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this [very] day.
 24But I tell you: on the day of judgment, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, than for you.
” Jesus prays to God the Father – Finding rest in Christ 25At that time, Jesus exclaimed, “I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth,c that you have hidden these things from the learned and intelligent, and revealed them to infants! 26Yes, Father, this was well-pleasing in your sight.
 27All things have been delivered to me by my Father.
 No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and the one to whom the Son desires to reveal him.
 28Come to me, all of you who labor and are heavily burdened, and I will give you rest! 29Take my yoke upon you and learn from me because I am gentle and humble of heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
d 30Indeed, my yoke is easy and my burden is light.
” a CT reads “actions / deeds / works” instead of “children” (but compare Luke 7:35).
 This variant reading was attested by Jerome.
 b Greek “they” c Compare Tobit 7:17 d Compare Sirach 51:26 (Jesus describes himself in a way that is reminiscent of Sirach’s description of Wisdom) THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 62 12 About the Sabbath – The Lord of the Sabbath At that time, on the Sabbath day, Jesus was going through grain fields.
 Being hungry, his disciples began to pluck heads of grain and to eat them.
 2When the Pharisees saw it, they said to him, “Behold, your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath!” 3But Jesus replied, “Have not you read what David did, when he and those who were with him were hungry? 4He entered into the house of God and ate the show bread,a which it was not lawful for him and those with him to eat, but only for the priests?b 5Or have you not read in the law, that on the Sabbath day, the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and yet remain without guilt?c 6But I tell you that someone greater than the temple is here! 7If you had known what this means, ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,’d you would not have condemned the innocent.
 8For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.
” The healing of the man with the withered hand 9Going from that place, he went into their synagogue.
 10And behold, there was a man with a withered hand.
 Looking for a reason to accuse Jesus,e the Phariseesf asked him, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day?” 11Jesus replied, “Who among you, having one sheep, and if this one falls into a pit on the Sabbath day, will not take hold of it and lift it out? 12Of how much more value is a man compared to a sheep! Therefore, it is lawful to do what is good on the Sabbath day.
” 13Then he told the man, “Stretch out your hand.
” The man stretched it out, and it was restored whole, just like the other hand! 14But the Pharisees went out and began to conspire against him, [discussing] how they might destroy him.
 15Perceiving it, Jesus withdrew from that place.
 Many [people] followed him and he healed them all, 16commanding them not to reveal who he was, 17so that what was spoken through Isaias (Isaiah) the prophet might be fulfilled: Behold, my servant whom I have chosen; my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased! I will put my Spirit on him, He will proclaim justice to the nations, He will not quarrel or shout; a Or “bread of the presence” 1 Samuel 21:3-6 c Compare Leviticus 24:5-9 d Hosea 6:6.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT e Greek “him” f Greek “they” - May also refer to the people in general (verse 2) b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ No one will hear his voice in the streets.
 He will not break a bruised reed, He will not put out a smoking wick, until he leads justice to victory.
 In his Name, the nationsa will hope.
b The Lord accused of casting out demons by Beelzebul – The unforgivable sin 22Then, a person possessed by a demon, blind and mute, was brought to him.
 Jesus healed him, so that the blind and mute man was now able to speak and to see.
 23The crowds were amazed and exclaimed, “Can this be the son of David?” 24However, when the Pharisees heard this, they said, “This man can only cast out demons by {the authority of} Beelzebul, the prince of the demons!” 25Knowing their thoughts, Jesus told them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
 26If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself.
 How then will his kingdom stand? 27If it is by Beelzebul that I cast out demons, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore, they will be your judges.
 28However, if it is by the Spirit of God that I cast out demons, then the Kingdom of God has come upon you.
 29Or how can someone enter into the house of the strong man and plunder his goods, unless he first bindc the strong man? Then he will [be able to] plunder his house.
 30Whoever is not with me is against me! Whoever does not gather with me scatters!d 31Therefore, I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven,e but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
 32Anyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but anyone who speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, neither in this age, nor in the one which is to come.
f The tree and its fruits 33Make the tree good and its fruit [will be] good, or make the tree corrupt and its fruit [will be] corrupt, for the tree is known by its fruit.
 34You offspring of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things? Indeed, a Or “Gentiles” Isaias (Isaiah) 42:1-4; NT agrees with LXX against MT c Compare Revelation 20:1-3 d Several authorities including א, Origen and Athanasius read “scatters me” which sounds unusual to modern ears but which is consistent with Acts 9:4 and the possible translation “divides me.
” However, this variant may also have an Alexandrian Gnostic origin.
 e Greek adds “to people” or “to men” f Acts 5:3-5 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 64 words flow out of what fills the heart.
a 35The good man brings out good things out of his good treasure, and the evil man brings out evil things out of his evil treasureb.
 36I tell you that for every idle word that people speak, they will give an account of it in the day of judgment.
 37For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.
” Asking for a sign – The sign of Jonah 38Then some of the scribes and Pharisees said, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you!” 39But Jesus answered, “An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, but no sign will be given to this generation except for the sign of Jonah the prophet.
 40For just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
 41The people of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it because they repented at the preaching of Jonah.
 And behold, someone greater than Jonah is here! 42The queen of the south will stand up in the judgment with this generation and she will condemn it because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon.
 And behold, someone greater than Solomon is here! An unclean spirit leaves and returns 43After anc unclean spirit has gone out of a man, he wanders through dry places seeking rest and does not find it.
 44He then says, ‘I will return into my house from which I came out,’ and when he has come back, he finds it empty, swept, and put in order! 45Then, he goes [around] and brings with himself seven other spirits more evil than he, and they enter in and dwell there.
 And so, the last state of that person becomes worse than the first.
 This is how it will be with this evil generation.
” The Lord’s true family 46While Jesusd was still speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, desiring to speak to him.
 47Someone said to him, “Behold, your mother and your brothers stand outside, desiring to see you.
”e 48But to the person who had spoken, Jesusf answered, “Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?” 49He then stretched out his hand towards his a Or “For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks” TR adds “of the heart” c Greek “the” d Greek “he” e CT brackets this verse.
 PT has “desiring to see you” while most other manuscripts read “seeking to speak to you” f Greek “he” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ disciples and said, “Behold, my mother and my brothers! 50As it is, whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven is my brother, and sister, and mother.
” 13 The parable of the sower On that day, Jesus went out of the house and sat down by the seaside.
 2Since great crowds had gathered to [listen to] him, he entered into a boat and sat while the people stood on the beach.
 3He told them many things in parables, saying, “Behold, a farmer went out to sow.
 4As he sowed, some seeds fell by the roadside, and the birds came and devoured them.
 5Others fell on rocky ground, where they did not have much soil, and immediately they sprang up.
 But because they had no depth of soil, 6when the sun rose, they were [quickly] scorched, and since they had no root, they withered away.
 7Others fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.
 8Others fell on good soil, and yielded fruit: some a hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty.
 9Anyone who has ears should listen!” Parables - The mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven 10The disciples came and asked him, “Why do you speak to them in parables?” 11He answered them, “To you, it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them, it is not given.
 12Anyone who has will be given more and will have in abundance; but the one who does not have will be deprived even of what he has.
 13Therefore, I speak to them in parables, because ‘seeing, they do not see,’ and ‘hearing, they do not hear,’ and neither do they understand.
 14In them, the prophecy of Isaias (Isaiah) is fulfilled, which says: By hearing you will hear, and will in no way understand;a Seeing you will see, and will in no way perceive: for this people’s heart has grown callous; their ears are dull of hearing, they have closed their eyes; otherwise, they might perhaps perceive with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and should turn again; and I would heal them.
a a NT agrees with LXX against MT THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 66 The parable of the sower explained 16But blessed are your eyes, because they see; and [blessed are] your ears, because they hear! 17Amen, I tell you that many among the prophets and the righteous desired to see what you see and they did not see them; and to hear what you hear, and [yet they] did not hear them.
 18Hear, then, the parable of the farmer.
 19When someone hears the word of the Kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away what has been sown in this person’s heart.
 This is what was sown by the roadside.
 20The seed sown on the rocky places is when someone hears the word and immediately receives it with joy.
 21Yet, this person has no root but endures only for a while.
 When oppression or persecution comes because of the word, this one immediately stumbles.
 22What was sown among the thorns is when someone hears the word, but the anxieties of this age and the deceitfulness of wealth choke the word, and so it produces nothing.
 23What was sown on the good ground is when someone hears the word, understands it, and truly bears fruit, bringing forth, some a hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty times as much.
” The parable of the good wheat and the weed grass 24He also presented them another parable in these words, “The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
 25While people slept, his enemy came and also sowed weed grassb among the wheat, and went away.
 26But when the wheat sprang up and brought forth fruit, the weeds also appeared.
 27The servants of the householder came [forward] and said to him, ‘Sir,c did you not sow good seed in your field? Where did this darnel come from?’ 28The man said to them, ‘An enemy has done this.
’ The servants then asked him, ‘Do you want us to go and gather them up?’ 29But the man replied, ‘No, for fear that while you gather up the darnel weeds, you might also uproot the wheat along with them.
 30Let both grow together until the harvest, and at the time of the harvest I will tell the reapers: “First, gather up the darnel weeds, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn.
”’” The parable of the mustard seed, of the yeast – The Lord’s us of parables 31Jesus also presented another parable to them, saying, “The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his a Isaias (Isaiah) 6:9-10 Darnel is a weed grass (probably bearded darnel or lolium temulentum) that looks very much like wheat until it is mature, when the difference becomes very apparent.
 c Or “Lord” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ field.
 32It is indeed smaller than all [other] seeds, but when it is grown, it is the biggest of shrubs and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air can come and find shelter in its branches.
” 33He told them another parable: “The kingdom of Heaven is like the yeast that a woman took and mixed in with three measures of flour, until it was all leavened.
” 34Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the crowds; and he did not speak to them without a parable, 35so that that had been spoken through the propheta might be fulfilled: I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world.
b The parable of the good seed and weeds explained 36Then Jesus sent the multitudes away and went into the house.
 His disciples came to him, saying, “Explain to us the parable of the grass weeds of the field.
” 37He answered them, “The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man.
 field is the world, the good seed the childrenc of the Kingdom and the darnel weeds are the children of the evil one.
 39The enemy who sowed them is the devil.
 The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.
 40As the weeds are gathered up and burned with fire, so will it be at the end of this age.
 41The Son of Man will send out his angels, and they will gather out of his Kingdom all things that cause stumbling,d and those who do evil, 42and he will cast them into the furnace of fire.
 There will be weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
 43Then the righteous will shine forth like the sun in the Kingdom of their Father.
e Anyone who has ears should listen! 38The Other illustrations of the Kingdom – Old and new treasures 44The Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field.
 When a man found it, he hid it again.
 In his joy, he then goes and sells all that he has, and buys that field! 45The Kingdom of Heaven is also like a man who is a merchant seeking fine pearls.
 46Having found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it.
 a Other ancient manuscripts (some no longer extant but attested by Jerome) read “through Isaias / Isaiah” or “through Asaph.
” b Psalms 78:2 / 77 LXX – a few manuscripts omit “of the world” c Or “sons / heirs / disciples / those having a special relationship with” d Romans 14:12-21 e Daniel 12:3 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 68 47The Kingdom of Heaven is like a dragnet cast into the sea which gathered fish of every kind.
 48When the net was filled, people drew it up on the beach.
 They sat down and gathered the good fish into containers, but the bad they threw away.
 49This is how it will be at the end of the age: the angels will come forth and separate the wicked from the righteous; 50they will cast them into the furnace of fire where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
” 51Jesus asked them, “Have you understood all these things?” They answered him, “Yes, Lord.
” 52He said to them, “Therefore, every trained persona who has been made a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like the owner of a house who brings out of his storeroom new and old things.
” Rejected in Nazareth 53When Jesus had finished [speaking] these parables, he departed from there.
 54Coming into his own country, he taught the people in their synagogue and they were astonished, saying, “Where did this man get this wisdom and these deeds of power? 55Is this not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers,b James, Joses, Simon, and Judas?c 56Are not all of his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all of these things?” 57And they stumbledd because of him.
 But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country and in his own house!” 58He did not do many deeds of power there because of their unbelief.
e 14 Herod and the beheading of John the Baptist At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard the report concerning Jesus, 2and he said to his servants, “This is John the Baptist! He is risen from the dead! That is why these powers work in him.
” 3As it is, Herod had arrested John, bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, the wife of his brotherf Philip.
 4For John had told him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.
” 5Even though Herod desired to have John put to death, he feared the crowds because they considered him to be a prophet.
 6But when Herod’s a Or “scribe / expert in the law / scholar” See Appendix E c Or “Judah” d Or “were scandalized” (evskandali,zont) e See Mark 6:1-6 f Actually half-brother – a few manuscripts (it) omit the name “Philip.
” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ birthday came, Herodias’ daughter danced among them and pleased Herod, 7so much that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask.
 8She, prompted by her mother, said, “Give me here, on a platter, the head of John the Baptist.
” 9The king was grieved, but for the sake of his oaths and because of those who sat at the table with him, he commanded that it be brought.
 10Herod gave orders and had John beheaded in the prison.
 11His head was brought on a platter, given to the young woman, and she brought it to her mother.
 12John’s disciples came, took the body, and buried it; and they went and told Jesus.
 13When Jesus heard this, he withdrew from that place in a boat and went to a deserted place apart.
 When the crowds heard about this, they followed him on foot from the cities.
 The feeding of the five thousand 14Jesus went out and saw that there was a great crowd.
 He had compassion on them and healed their sick.
 15When evening came, his disciples came to him and said, “This place is deserted, and the hour is already late.
 Send the crowds away so that they may go into the villages and buy food for themselves.
” 16But Jesus said to them, “They do not need to go away.
 You give them something to eat.
” 17They replied, “We only have here five loaves and two fish!” 18Jesus said, “Bring them to me.
” 19Having instructed the crowds to sit down on the grass, he took the five loaves and the two fish.
 Looking up to heaven,a he blessed, broke and gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples distributed it to the multitudes.
 20And so, everyone ate and was satisfied.
 His disciples gathered up twelve baskets full of what remained left over from the broken pieces.
 21Those who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
 The Lord and Peter walk on water 22Immediately after this, Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and told them to go ahead of him to the other side, while he would send the crowds away.
 23After he had sent the people away, he went up into the mountain by himself in order to pray.
 When evening came, he was there alone.
 24But the boat was now in the middle of the sea, distressed by the waves, because the wind was against it.
 25In the fourth watch of the night,b Jesus came to them, a b Or “to the sky The night was equally divided into four watches, so the fourth watch is approximately 3:00 am to sunrise.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 70 walking on the sea.
a 26When the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubledb and said, “It is a ghost!” and they cried out in fear.
 27But at once, Jesus spoke to them, saying “Take heart! It is I!c Do not be afraid.
” 28Peter answered him and said, “Lord, if it is you, tell me to come to you upon the waters.
” 29And Jesus said, “Come!” Peter stepped down from the boat and walked on the waters to come to Jesus.
 30But when he saw that the wind was strong, he became afraid and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, “Lord, save me!” 31Immediately, Jesus stretched out his hand, took hold of Peter,d and said, “You of little faith, why did you doubt?” 32When they got up into the boat, the wind ceased.
 33Those who were in the boat came [forward] and expressed adoration toe him, saying, “You are truly the Son of God!” Healings in Gennesaret 34When they had crossed over [the lake], they arrived in the land of Gennesaret.
 35When the people of that place recognized Jesus,f they sent word into that entire surrounding region and people brought him all who were sick.
 36They begged him to be able to just touch the fringe of his garment, and all those who touched it were healed.
 15 About tradition(s) that nullify the word of God Pharisees and scribes then came to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying: 2“Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the presbyters? For they do not wash their hands when they eat bread.
” 3Jesus answered them, “Why do you also disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition? 4For God commanded, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’g and, ‘Whoever speaks evil of father or mother should be put to death.
’h 5But you say, ‘Anyone may tell his father or his mother, a See Job 9:8 Or “perplexed,” even “panicked” c Or “I AM!” (evgw, eivmi) d Greek “him” e proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) f Greek “him” g Exodus 20:12; Deuteronomy 5:16 h Exodus 21:17; Leviticus 20:9 b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ “Whatever supporta you might otherwise have received from me is now a gift devoted to God,” and is not bound to honor his father or mother.
’b 6Thus, you have made the commandmentc of God void because of your tradition.
 7You hypocrites! Isaias (Isaiah) prophesied about you quite well when he said: These people draw near to me with their mouth,d and honor me with their lips; but their heart is far from me! In vain do they express adoration toe me, teaching as doctrine rules made by men.
f 10Jesusg gathered the crowds and said to them, “Hear, and understand.
 enters into the mouth does not defile a person, but what comes out of the mouth, this is what defiles a person.
” 11What 12Then, the disciples came and said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this saying?” 13But Jesus answered, “Every plant which my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted.
 14Leave them alone! They are blind guides of the blind; and if the blind guide the blind, both will fall into a pit.
” 15Peter said to him, “Explain the parable to us.
” 16And so, Jesus answered, “Do you still fail to understand? 17Do you not understand that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the stomach and then out of the body? 18But the things which come out of the mouth come from the heart, and they defile the person.
 19Indeed, it is from the heart that evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual sins, thefts, false witness, and blasphemies come forth.
 20These are the things which defile a person; but to eat with unwashed hands does not make anyone impure.
” The faith of a Canaanite woman - Crumbs from their masters’ table 21Jesus then left that area and withdrew into the region of Tyre and Sidon.
 a Canaanite woman came out from those borders and cried out, “Have mercy on me, Lord, you son of David! My daughter is severely demonized!” 22Behold, a Or “help, assistance” CT omits “or mother” c CT reads “word” and another variant is “law” d CT omits “draw near to me with their mouth” which may have been added to harmonize with the OT LXX quotation (see note below) e proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) f Isaias (Isaiah) 29:13.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT g Greek “he” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 23But 72 Jesus did not answer her a word.
 His disciples came and begged him, saying, “Send her away! She is shouting after us!” 24However, Jesus answered, “I was not sent to anyone but the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
” 25Still, the womana came forward and expressed adoration tob him, saying, “Lord, help me.
” 26But he answered, “It is not rightc to take the children’s bread and throw it to the little dogs.
” 27But she replied, “Yes, Lord, but even the little dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table.
” 28Then Jesus answered her, “Woman, great is your faith! Let it be it done to you even as you desire.
” And her daughter was healed from that hour.
 Other healings – Feeding of the four thousand 29Jesus departed and came near the sea of Galilee.
 He went up into the mountain and sat there.
 30Great crowds came to him, bringing with them the lame, blind, mute, crippled, and many others; and they put them down at his feet.
 So he healed them, 31and the crowds were amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the maimed made whole, the lame walking and the blind seeing; and they glorified the God of Israel.
 32Jesus called his disciples and said, “I have compassion on the crowd because they have remained with me for three days now and they have nothing to eat.
 I do not want to send them away hungry, or they might faint on the way.
” 33The disciples said to him, “But where should we get so many loaves in a deserted place in order to satisfy such a great multitude?” 34Jesus asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” They replied, “Seven, and a few small fish.
” 35Jesus then told the people to sit down on the ground 36and took the seven loaves and the fish.
 He gave thanks, broke them, and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples distributed [the food] to the multitudes.
 37Everyone ate and was satisfied.
 They gathered up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left over.
 38Those who ate were four thousand a Greek “she” proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) c Or “appropriate” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ men, besides women and children.
 39Then, Jesus sent the people away, got into the boat, and came to the borders of Magdala.
a 16 Seeking after a sign - The yeast or leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees The Pharisees and Sadducees came and put Jesus to the test by asking him to show them a signb from heaven.
 2But he answered them,c “When it is evening, you say, ‘The weather will be pleasant because the sky is red.
’ 3In the morning, you say, ‘The weather will be bad today because the sky is red and threatening.
’ Hypocrites! You know how to discern the appearance of the sky, but you cannot discern the signs of the times! 4An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, but no sign will be given to this generation, except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
” He left them and moved on.
 5The disciples, arriving to the other side, [noticed that they] had forgotten to take bread.
 6Jesus then said to them, “Take heed and beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees!” 7At this, they reasoned among themselves, saying, “We brought no bread!” 8Perceiving this, Jesus said, “Why do you reason among yourselves, you of little faith, ‘because you have brought no bread?’ 9Do you still not understand or remember the five loaves that fed the five thousand and how many baskets you gathered up? 10Or do you not remember the seven loaves for the four thousand and how many baskets you took up? 11How is it that you do not understand that I was not speaking to you about {physical} bread? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees!” 12Then, they understood that he had not told them to beware of the yeast of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
 Peter’s confession – “I will build my Church” 13Now, when Jesus arrived in the area of Caesarea Philippi, he asked a question to his disciples, saying, “Who do people say that I, the Son of Man, am?”d 14They replied, “Some say John the Baptist, some say Elias (Elijah), and others say Jeremiah or one of the prophets.
” 15Jesus a then said to them, “But [you], who do you say that I am?” Other manuscripts read “Magadan / Magedan” and “Magdalan” Greek shmei/on c CT brackets verse 2 and 3 after “them” (omitted in  אand B.
 Also omitted in Origen’s commentary on Matthew.
 It parallels Luke 12.
54-57 but with some differences.
) d CT (א, B) reads “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 16Simon 74 Peter answered, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God!” 17And Jesus answered him, “Blessed are you,a Simon Barb Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven.
 18I also tell you that you are Peter,c and upon this rock I will build my Church,d and the gates of hadese will not prevail against it.
 19I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven; and whatever you loose on earth will have been loosed in heaven.
” 20Then, he commanded the disciples not to tell anyone that he was Jesus,f the Christ.
g The passion announced – The Lord rebukes Peter - Discipleship 21From that time, Jesus began to explain to his disciples that he had to go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the presbyters, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up.
 22Peter then took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying, “Far be it from you, Lord! This will never be done to you!” 23But Jesus turned and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, for you are not setting your mind on the things of God but on the things of men.
” 24Then Jesus said to his disciples, “If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
 25Whoever desires to save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it.
 26Indeed, what will it profit a man, if he gains the whole world and loses his life? Or what will a person give in exchange for his life? 27For the Son of Man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then, he will render to everyone according to their deeds.
 28Amen, I tell you: some are standing here who will not have tasted death until they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom.
”h 17 The Lord’s transfiguration – Elijah’s coming Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John his brother, and he brought them up into a high mountain by themselves.
 2[There], he was transfigured before them.
 His face shone like the sun, and his garments a Singular “you” in verses 17-19 “Son of” c Peter’s name is (Pe,troj) Petros (Rock) in Greek, Kepha in Aramaic (also Kephas / Khfa/j in the NT) d See Appendix B e That is “the power of death” (see Hebrews 2:15 and Psalms 24 / 23 LXX) f CT omits “Jesus” g Or “Messiah / Anointed One” (Cristo,j) h Generally understood as a reference to the Transfiguration (following chapter) b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ became as white as the light.
 3And behold, Moses and Elias (Elijah) appeared to them, talking with him.
 4Peter then said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here! If you want, let usa make three tents here: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elias (Elijah).
” 5While Peter was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them.
 And behold, a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
 Listen to him.
” 6When the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces and were very afraid.
 came and touched them, saying, “Get up, and do not be afraid.
” 8Lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, except Jesus alone.
 9As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus gave them this order, “Do not tell anyone what you saw, until the Son of Man has risen from the dead.
” 7Jesus 10His disciples asked him, “Why then is it that the scribes say that Elias (Elijah) must come first?” 11Jesus answered them, “Elias (Elijah) indeed is coming first,b and he will restore all things.
 12But I tell you that Elias (Elijah) has already come, and they did not recognize him.
 Instead, they did to him whatever they wanted to.
 Likewise, the Son of Man will also suffer at their hands.
” 13Then, the disciples understood that he was speaking about John the Baptist.
 c The healing of a possessed boy 14When they came to the crowd, a man came to Jesus.
d He knelt down before him and said: 15“Lord, have mercy on my son! He is epileptic and suffers terribly as he often falls into the fire and in the water.
 16And so, I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.
” 17Jesus answered, “Faithless and perverse generation! How much longer must I be with you? How long must I bear with you? Bring him to me.
” 18When Jesus rebuked it, the demon went out of the boy and he was cured from that hour.
 19Then, the disciples came to Jesus in private and asked, “Why were we not able to cast it out?” 20He replied, “Because of your unbelief!e Amen, I tell you that if you have faith [even] like a grain of mustard seed, you will tell this mountain, ‘Move a Or “we will,” but CT (א, B) reads “I will” CT omits “first” c Compare Sirach 48:10 d Greek “him” e CT reads “little faith” which has good manuscript support b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 76 from here to there,’ and it will move; and nothing will be impossible for you! 21But this kind [of spirit] does not go out except by prayer and fasting.
”a The passion announced again – The payment of the temple tax 22While they were stayingb in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is about to be delivered into the hands of men.
 23They will kill him, and the third day, he will be raised up.
” They were extremely distressed.
 24When they arrived in Capernaum, those who collected the temple taxc came to Peter, and said, “Does not your teacher pay the temple tax?” 25He replied, “Yes {he does}.
” When he came into the house, Jesus spoke to him first, saying, “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tribute? From their children, or from foreigners?”d 26Peter replied, “From strangers!” Jesus said to him, “Therefore, the children are exempt.
 27But in order not to cause them to stumble, go to the sea, cast a hook, and take up the first fish that comes up.
 When you have opened its mouth, you will find a stater coin.
e Take it, and give it to them for me and you.
” 18 Like a child – Greatest in the Kingdom – Causing little ones to sin At that time, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Who then is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?” 2Jesus called a little child to himself and set him in their midst.
 3He then said, “Amen, I tell you that unless you change and become as little children, you will in no way enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
 4But whoever humbles himself as this little child is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.
 5Whoever receives such a little child in my Name receives me, 6but whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for such a person that a huge millstone be hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.
 a CT omits this verse CT reads “gathering together” c A didrachma is a Greek silver coin worth 2 drachmas, about as much as 2 Roman denarii, or about 2 days’ wages.
 It was commonly used to pay the half-shekel temple tax, because 2 drachmas were worth one half shekel of silver.
 d Or “strangers” e A stater is a silver coin equivalent to four Attic or two Alexandrian drachmas, or a Jewish shekel: just exactly enough to cover the half-shekel temple tax for two people.
 b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 7Woe to the world because of occasions of stumbling! Such occasions are bound to come, but woe to the one through whom the occasion does come! 8If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off, and throw it away from you! It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled rather than to have two hands or two feet and yet be cast into eternal fire.
 9If your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and throw it away from you.
 It is better for you to enter into life with one eye, rather than to be cast into the Gehennaa of fire having two eyes.
 10Do not despise any of these little ones, for I tell you that in heaven, their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven.
 11For the Son of Man has come to save the lost.
b The parable of the lost sheep 12What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep and one of them goes astray, does he not leave the ninety-nine to go into the mountains and look for the one that has gone astray? 13Amen, I tell you: if he finds it, he rejoices over this one more than over the ninety-nine which did not go astray.
 14Likewise, it is not the willc of your Father who is in heaven that any of these little ones should perish.
 Dealing with a brother who has sinned – The authority of the Church 15If your brother sins against you,d go, show him his fault between you and him alone.
 If he listens to you, you have gained back your brother! 16But if he does not listen, take one or two more with you, so that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
e 17If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the Church.
 If he refuses to hear the Church also, let him be to you as a Gentile or a tax collector.
 18Amen, I tell youf that whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will have been loosed in heaven.
 19Again, I tell you that if two of you will agree on earth concerning anything they will ask, it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven.
 20Indeed, where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there I am among them.
”g a Or “hell” CT omits this verse c Or “desire” d A few manuscripts omit “against you” including (א, B, 0281, Origen) e Deuteronomy 19:15 f Plural “you” in verses 18-19 g Or “in their midst” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 78 The parable of the unforgiving servant 21Then Peter came forward and asked Jesus,a “Lord, how often shall I forgive my brother who sins against me? Until seven times?” 22Jesus said to him, “I do not tell you until seven times, but seventy times seven! 23Therefore, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a king who wanted to settle his accounts with his servants.
 24When he began the settlement, someone was brought in who owed him ten thousand talents.
b 25But because the servantc could not pay, his lord gave orders that he be sold, with his wife, children, and all that he had, so that payment may be made.
 26At this, the servant fell down on his knees before him, saying: ‘Lord, have patience with me, and I will repay you all!’ 27The lord of that servant, moved with compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt.
 28However, that servant went out and found one of his fellow-servants who owed him one hundred denarii.
d He grabbed him and took him by the throat, saying: ‘Pay me what you owe!’ 29And so, his fellow-servant fell down at his feet and begged him, saying: ‘Have patience with me, and I will repay you!’ 30But the first man would not [have compassion] but went off and had him cast into prison, until he should pay back what was due.
 31When his [other] fellow-servants saw what had been done, they were extremely distressed and came to their lord to report all that had taken place.
 32Then, his lord summoned the [first] servant and said to him, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt because you begged me.
 33Should not you also have had mercy on your fellow-servant, even as I had mercy on you?’ 34His lord was angry and delivered him to the jailerse until he would pay all that was due.
 35This is how my heavenly Father will also treat you if you do not each forgive each other from your hearts.
” 19 About marriage and divorce – Eunuchs for the sake of the Kingdom When Jesus had finished [speaking] these words, he departed from Galilee and arrived at the borders of Judea, beyond the Jordan.
 2Great crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
 3Pharisees came to him to test him, asking, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?” a Greek “him” Ten thousand talents represents an extremely large sum of money, equivalent to about 60,000,000 denarii, where one denarius was typical of one day’s wages for agricultural labor.
 c Greek “he” d 100 denarii was about one sixtieth of a talent.
 e Or “tormentors” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 4Jesus answered, “Have you not read that he who madea them from the beginning made them male and female,b 5and said, ‘For this reason, a man shall leave his father and mother and shall be attached to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh?’c 6And so, they are no longer two, but one flesh! Therefore, what God has joined together, let no one tear apart.
” 7They asked him, “Why then did Moses command us to give our wifed a bill of divorce and send her away?” 8Jesus replied, “Because of the hardness of your hearts, Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it has not been so.
 9I tell you that whoever divorces his wife (except for reason of sexual immoralitye) and marries another commits adultery;f and he who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
” 10His disciples said to him, “If this is the situation of the man with his wife, it is not advantageous to marry!” 11But Jesus said to them, “Not all men can receive this saying: only those to whom it is given.
 12Certainly, there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother’s womb, there are also eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven.
 He who is able to receive this saying, let him receive it.
” The Lord blesses little children 13Then, little children were brought to him so that he may lay his hands on them and pray.
 The disciples began to rebuke the people, 14but Jesus said, “Allow the little children and do not forbid them to come to me, for the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to ones like these.
” 15He laid his hands on them, and departed from that place.
 The rich young man – How to enter into eternal life 16Behold, a man came to him and asked, “Goodg teacher, what good thing shall I do in order to have eternal life?” a CT reads “created” Genesis 1:27 c Genesis 2:24 d Greek “her” e Greek pornei,a.
 The Roman Catholic translation of this clause as “I am not speaking of an illicit marriage” (NJB) or “unless the marriage is unlawful” (NAB) is very unlikely.
 f CT omits the end of verse (“and he who marries a divorced woman commits adultery”).
 There are significant variants on this verse.
 In particular, D.
C.
 Parker, in his "The Living Text of the Gospels" (1997: 85-86) lays out eight different variant readings.
 Compare with 5:32 which does not have variants.
 g CT omits “good” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 80 17Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good?a No one is good but one, that is, God.
 But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments.
” 18The man asked him, “Which ones?” Jesus replied, “‘You shall not murder.
’ ‘You shall not commit adultery.
’ ‘You shall not steal.
’ ‘You shall not bear false witness.
’ 19‘Honor your father and mother;’b and, ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.
’”c 20The young man then said to him, “All these things I have observed from my youth! What do I still lack?” 21Jesus replied, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have, give it to the poor, and you will have [a] treasure in heaven.
 Then come, and follow me!” 22But when the young man heard <these words>, he went away sad because he was a person with great possessions.
 23Jesus said to his disciples, “Amen I say to you: it will be hard for someone who is rich to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven! 24Indeed, I tell you that it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.
” 25When the disciples heard this, they were extremely astonished and said, “Who then can be saved?” 26Gazing at them, Jesus answered, “By human resources,d this is impossible, but with God all things are possible!” 27Then Peter said, “Behold, we have left everything and followed you.
 What then will we have?” 28Jesus said to them, “Amen, I tell you that you who have followed me, at the regeneration,e when the Son of Man will sit on the throne of his glory, you also will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
 29Everyone who has left houses, brothers, sisters, father, mother, wife,f children, or lands for my Name’s sake will receive a hundred times [more] and will inherit eternal life.
 30But many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first!” a CT reads “Why do you ask me about what is good? [There] is [only] One [who] is good.
” Exodus 20:12-16; Deuteronomy 5:16-20 c Leviticus 19:18 d Greek para.
 avnqrw,poij tou/to avdu,nato,n evstin.
.
 EOB follows the NJB understanding of this expression, but other common translations are “With men this is impossible” (KJV, NIV) or “For mortals it is impossible” (NRSV).
 e Or “recreation, renewal of all things” (paliggenesi,a)| f CT omits “wife” but compare Luke 18:29 where all manuscripts agree.
 b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 20 Laborers in the vineyard “The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who was the master of a household and who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
 2After agreeing with the laborers for a [salary of one] denariusa a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
 3[Later], he went out when it was about the third hourb and saw other men standing idle in the marketplace.
 4He told them, ‘You too should go into the vineyard, and I will pay you whatever is right.
’ And so, they went their way.
 5Again, he went out when it was about the sixth and the ninth hour,c and did the same thing.
 6About the eleventh hour,d he went out and still found others standing idle.
 He asked them, ‘Why do you stand here all day, doing nothing?’ 7They said to him, ‘Because no one has hired us!’ The master told them, ‘You too should go into the vineyard, and you will receive whatever is right.
’ 8When evening came, the lord of the vineyard said to his manager, ‘Call the laborers and pay them their wages, beginning from the last to the first.
’ 9When those who were hired at about the eleventh hour came, they each received a denarius.
 10Now, when the first came, they supposed that they would receive more, but they each likewise received one denarius.
 11When they received it, they grumbled against the master of the household, 12saying: ‘These last [workers] have spent one hour, and yet you have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat!’ 13But the master answered to one of them, ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong! Did you not agree with me for one denarius? 14Take what is yours, and go your way.
 What if I wishe to give to this last one just as much as to you! 15Is it not lawful for me to do what I want with what I own? Or is your eye evil, because I am good?’ 16And so, the last will be first, and the first last! Indeed, many are called, but few are chosen.
”f a A denarius is a silver Roman coin worth 1/25th of a Roman aureus.
 This was a common wage for a day of farm labor.
 b Time was measured from sunrise to sunset, so the third hour would be about 9:00 am.
 c Noon and 3:00 pm d 5:00 pm e Or possibly as an affirmation “I desire to give…” f CT omits this last clause.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 82 The passion announced for the third time 17As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the Twelve disciples aside, and on the way he said to them, 18“Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes.
 They will condemn him to death, 19and they will hand him over to the Gentiles to mock, scourge and crucify him.
 And on the third day, he will be raised up.
” Request from James and John – The great shall be the servant 20Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, kneeling and asking a certain thing of him.
 21He said to her, “What do you want?” She said to him, “Command that these, my two sons, may sit, one on your right hand, and one on your left hand, in your Kingdom.
” 22But Jesus answered, “You do not know what you are asking! Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink,a and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?” They said to him, “We are able!” 23Jesus answered, “You will indeed drink my cup and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, but to sit on my right and on [my] left hand is not mine to give! It is [reserved] for whom it has been prepared by my Father.
” 24When the ten heard [about] this, they were upsetb with the two brothers.
 25However, Jesus called them together and said, “You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them, and great ones make their authority felt.
 26But it shall not be so among you! Instead, whoever desires to become great among you shall bec your servant.
 27Whoever desires to be firstd among you shall be your servant,e 28even as the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransomf for many.
”g a CT omits the end of the verse which appear to be a scribal harmonization with Mark 10:38-39 Or “indignant” c TR reads “let him be” instead of “shall be” d Greek prw/toj e Or “slave” f Greek lu,tron - a means of release or redeeming g A few manuscripts (D, it, syriac) add the following: “But as for you, though you are little to seek to make yourselves important and from greatness you make yourselves small.
 When you are invited to a banquet, do not take one of the seats of honor because someone more important than you may arrive.
 Then the host would have to say, ‘move down lower’ and you would be put to shame.
 Take the lowest place then, and if someone less important than you comes in, the host will say to you, ‘move up higher!’ And this would be to your advantage.
” (Compare Luke 22:24-27) b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ The healing of two blind men 29As they were leaving Jericho, a great crowd was following Jesus.
a two blind men were sitting by the road, and when they heard that Jesus was passing by, they cried out, “Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!” 31The crowd rebuked them and told them to be quiet, but the blind men cried out even more, “Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!” 30Behold, 32Jesus stood still and called them, asking, “What do you want me to do for you?” 33They told him, “Lord, that our eyes may be opened!” 34Moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes received their sight, and they began to follow him.
 21 The Lord’s entrance into Jerusalem As they were approaching Jerusalem and came to Bethsphage,b to the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples [ahead of the group].
 2He told them, “Go into the village that is opposite you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her.
 Untie them, and bring them to me.
 3If anyone says anything to you, you shall say, ‘The Lord has need of them,’ and immediately, he will let them go.
” 4All this was done so that what had been spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled: Tell the daughter of Zion, behold, your King comes to you, humble, and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
c 6The disciples went and did exactly what Jesus had instructed them.
 7They brought the donkey and the colt, laid their clothes on them, and Jesus sat on them.
d 8A very great crowd spread their clothes on the road while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.
 9Many people went before him and those who followed kept shouting, “Hosannae a Greek “him” TR & CT read “Bethphage” instead of “Bethsphage” c Zechariah 9:9 d There are several types of variant readings for verses 5-7 which attempt to harmonize Matthew’s account with the fact that the other evangelists mention only one animal.
 e “Hosanna” means “save us” or “help us, we pray.
” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 84 to the son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the Name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!”a 10When he had come into Jerusalem, the entire city was stirred up and people were saying, “Who is this?” 11And the multitude answered, “This is the prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee!” The cleansing of the temple 12Jesus entered into the temple of Godb and drove out all of those who did business there.
c He overthrew the table of the money changers and the seats of those who sold doves.
 13He said to them, “It is written, ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer,’d but you have made it a den of thieves!”e 14The blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
 when the chief priests and the scribes saw the amazing things that he was doing and that children were shouting in the temple and saying “Hosanna to the son of David!,” they were very displeased.
 16They asked him, “Do you hear what these [children] are saying?” 15But Jesus replied, “Yes! Have you never read, ‘Out of the mouth of babes and nursing babies you have prepared praise?’”f The cursing of the fig tree 17He left them, went out of the city to Bethany and spent the night there.
 the morning, as he was returning to the city, he was hungry.
 19Seeing a fig tree by the roadside, he came to it, and found nothing on it but leaves.
 He said to it, “Let there be no fruit from you, unto the ages!” 18In Immediately the fig tree withered away! 20When the disciples saw it, they marveled and asked, “How did the fig tree wither away at once?” 21Jesus answered them, “Amen, I tell you that if you have faith and do not doubt, you will not only do what was done to the fig tree, but even if you told this mountain ‘Be taken up and cast into the sea,’ it would be done! 22Whatever you ask in prayer, if you believe, you will receive them all!” By what authority 23When he had come into the temple, the chief priests and the presbyters of the people came to him as he was teaching.
 They asked, “By what authority do you do these things? Who gave you this authority?” a Psalms 118:26 / LXX 117 CT omits “of God” c Or “sold and bought in the temple” d Isaias (Isaiah) 56:7 e Jeremiah 7:11 f Psalms 8:2.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 24Jesus answered them, “I also will ask you one question and if you answer me, I will also tell you by what authority I do these things.
 25The baptism of John, where was it from? From heaven or from men?” They reasoned among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask us, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’ 26But if we say, ‘From men,’ we fear the crowd because everyone considers John as a prophet.
” 27So they answered Jesus: “We do not know.
” He also said to them, “Then neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.
” The parable of the two sons – The parable of the vineyard tenants 28“But what do you think? A man had two sons.
 He came to the first and said, ‘Son, go work today in my vineyard.
’ 29The son answered, ‘I will not,’ but afterward he was sorrya and went.
 30The father came to his second son, and said the same thing.
 The son answered, ‘I will go, sir,’b but he did not go.
 31Which one of the two sons did the will of his father?” They replied, “The first.
”c Jesus said to them, “Amen, I tell you that tax collectors and prostitutes are entering into the Kingdom of God befored you! 32For John came to you in the way of righteousness and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him.
 After seeing this, you did not even repent and you did not believe him.
 33Hear another parable.
 There was a man who was the ownere of a household.
 He planted a vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower and leased it out to farmers.
 He then left for another country.
 34When the season for the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers, to receive his fruit.
 35But the farmers took his servants, beat one, killed another, and stoned yet another.
 36Again, the owner sent other servants, even more than the first time; and they treated them in the same way.
 37Then, he sent his son to them, saying: ‘They will respect my son!’ 38But the farmers, when they saw the son, said to each other, ‘This is the heir! Come, let us kill him and seize his inheritance.
’ 39And so, they seized him, threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
 40Therefore, when the lord of the vineyard returns, what will he do with those farmers?” a Greek metamelhqei.
j – or “changed his mind” Or “Lord” (ku,rie) c A few manuscripts, notably D, read “the second” which is unlikely but presents the Jewish leaders as spoiling the parable by giving (seemingly deliberately,) the wrong answer.
 d Or “ahead of” e Or “master” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 86 41They answered him, “He will bring those wretches to a wretched end and he will lease out the vineyard to other farmers who will give him the fruit in its season.
” 42Jesus said to them, “Have you never read in the Scriptures: ‘The [very] stone which the builders rejected was made the head of the corner.
 This was from the Lord and it is marvelous in our eyes?’a 43Therefore, I tell you that the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and it will be given to a peopleb bringing forth its fruit.
 44Whoever falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, and whoever it will fall on will be scattered as dust.
”c 45When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he had spoken about them.
 46They began to look for a way to arrest Jesus,d but they feared the crowds because the people considered him to be a prophet.
 22 The parable of the wedding feast – The wedding garment Jesus now addressed them with another parable, saying: 2“The Kingdom of Heaven is like a king who planned a wedding feast for his son.
 3He then sent out his servants to call those who were invited to the wedding feast, but they refused to come.
 4Again, the king sent out other servants, saying: ‘Tell those who are invited, “Behold, I have prepared my dinner! My cattle and my fatted calves have been killed and everything is ready.
 Come to the wedding feast!”’ 5But those who were invited made light of it and went off, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise, 6and the others seized the king’s servants, treated them shamefully, and killed them.
 7When the king heard about it, he was furious.
 He sent out his soldiers to destroy those murderers and to burn their city.
 8Then, the king said to his servants, ‘The wedding is ready, but those who were invited were not worthy.
 9Go therefore to the crossroads of the highways, and as many people as you may find, invite to the wedding feast.
’ 10Those servants went out into the highways and gathered as many people as they could find, both good and bad.
 Thus, the wedding [hall] was filled with guests.
 11But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw a man a Psalms 118:22-23 / 117 LXX Greek e;qnei c CT brackets this verse d Greek “him” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ who was not wearing a wedding garment.
 12He asked him, ‘Friend, how did you come in here, not wearing a wedding garment?’ And the man was speechless.
 13Then the king said to the servants, ‘Bind him hand and foot, take him away,a and throw him into the outer darkness where there will be weeping and grinding of teeth.
’ 14For many are called, but few chosen.
” Paying taxes to Caesar 15Then the Pharisees went off and took counsel on how they might ensnare Jesusb in his talk.
 16They sent their own disciples to Jesus, along with the Herodians, and asked, “Teacher, we know that you are honest and that you teach the way of God in truth.
 You are not swayed by men because you pay no attention to who they are.
 17Tell us therefore, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?” 18But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, “Why do you test me, you hypocrites? 19Show me the tax money.
” They brought him a denarius.
 20Jesus asked them, “Whose imagec and inscription is this?” 21They answered, “Caesar’s.
” Then he said to them, “Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.
” 22When they heard this [reply], they were amazed, and leaving him, they went away.
 The Sadducees question the resurrection 23On that [same] day, Sadducees (those who say that there is no resurrection,) came to him.
 They asked him [a question], 24saying, “Teacher, Moses said, ‘If a man dies without having children, his brother shall marry his wife and have a posterity for his brother.
’ 25Now there were with us seven brothers.
 The first married and died, and having no descendant he left his wife to his brother.
 26In the same way, the second also, and the third, to the seventh.
 27After them all, the woman also died.
 28In the resurrection therefore, which one of the seven brothers will have her as wife, for they all had her as wife?” 29But Jesus answered them, “You are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures or the power of God.
 30For in the resurrection, peopled neither marry nor a CT omits “take him away” Greek “him” c Greek eivkw.
n d Greek “they” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 88 are given in marriage, but they are like <the> angels <of God>a in heaven.
 31However, concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God, saying: 32‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?’b God is not the God of the dead,c but of the living!” 33When the crowds heard it, they were astonished at his teaching.
 34But the Pharisees, when they heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, gathered together.
 The greatest commandment 35One of them, a lawyer, then asked him a question in order to test him.
 which is the greatest commandment in the law?” 36“Teacher, 37Jesus said to him, “‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.
’d 38This is the first and great commandment.
 39The second is likewise,e ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.
’f 40The entire law and the prophets depend on these two commandments.
” About Messiah, Son of David 41Now while the Pharisees were assembled, Jesus asked them a question, “What do you think of the Messiah?g Whose son is he?” 42saying, They answered, “[He is the son] of David.
” 43Jesus saying: said to them, “How, then, does David, in the Spirit, call him ‘Lord,’ ‘The Lordh said to my Lord, i sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet?’j 45If a then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?” CT reads “like angels in heaven” Exodus 3:6.
 Jesus quotes from the Pentateuch which was the only ‘canon’ accepted by the Sadducees.
 c CT reads “He is not the God of the dead but of the living.
” A very strong case can be made for variant 1 (in NTTT) based on א, D and W.
 In this case, theos is indefinite and descriptive to emphazise what king of God God is.
 d Deuteronomy 6:5 e Or “similar, like unto it” f Leviticus 19:18 g Or “Christ” h Greek o` ku,rioj – Hebrew Yahweh (hw"hy) i Greek kuri,w| mou j Psalms 110:1 / 109 LXX b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 46No one was able to answer him a word, and from that day on, no one dared to ask him any more questions.
 23 Woe on the Scribes and Pharisees Jesus then spoke to the crowds and to his disciples, 2saying, “The scribes and the Pharisees have seated themselvesa in the chair of Moses.
 3Therefore, whatever they tell you to observe, observe and do, but do not imitate their works; for they preach and [yet] do not act accordingly.
 4Indeed, they bind heavy burdens that are dreadful to bear and put them on people’s shoulders; but they themselves will not lift a finger to help them.
 5Instead, they do all their works to be seen by men.
 They make their phylacteriesb broad, they enlarge the fringesc <of their garments,> 6and love the place of honor at feasts.
 They love the best seats in the synagogues, 7the greetings in the marketplaces, and to be called ‘Rabbi, <Rabbi>’d by people.
 8But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for one is your teacher, the Christ, and all of you are brothers.
 9Call no man on the earth ‘your father,’ for one is your Father, he who is in heaven.
 10And do not be called ‘teacher,’e for one is your teacher, the Christ.
f 11Instead, the one who is the greatest among you shall be your servant.
 12Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
 13Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you devour widows’ houses, and as a pretense you make long prayers.
 Therefore, you will receive a greater condemnation.
 14Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you shut the Kingdom of Heaven in the face of people and you yourselves do not enter! And those who would enter, you prevent from doing so.
g 15Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel around by sea and land to make one convert; and when one is converted, you make him twice as much of an heirh of Gehennai as yourselves.
 a Or “are seated / have taken their seat” Phylacteries (tefillin in Hebrew) are small leather pouches that some Jewish men wear on their forehead and arm in prayer.
 They are used to carry a small scroll with some Scripture in it.
 Jews would reverently kiss them before and after use.
 See Deuteronomy 6:8.
 c Or “tassels” d CT omits this repetition e Or “leader/ professor/ master” (Greek kaqhghtai) f CT omits “the Christ” g Some Greek manuscripts reverse the order of verses 13 and 14, and some omit verse 13, numbering verse 14 as 13.
 h Or “a son” i Or “hell” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 90 16Woe to you, you blind guides, who say, ‘If someone swears by the sanctuary, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of the sanctuary is bound.
’ 17You blind fools! Which is greater, the gold, or the sanctuary that sanctifies the gold? 18You say, ‘If someone swears by the altar, it is nothing; but if someone swears by the gift that is placed on it, he is bound!’ 19You blind <and fool> men! Which is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift? 20Therefore, whoever swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
 21Whoever swears by the sanctuary swears by it and by the one dwellinga in it.
 22Whoever swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and by the one who sits on it.
 23Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint, dill, and cumin,b but you have not fulfilled the truly significant matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faith.
 It is these you should have practiced, without neglecting the others.
 24You are blind guides who filter out a fly and yet swallow a camel! 25Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the outside of the cup and the platter, but inside, they are full of greed and unrighteousness.
c 26You blind Pharisees, first clean the inside of the cup and platter, so that the outside may also become clean.
 27Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitewashed tombs which appear beautiful on the outside, but inside, they are full of dead bones and all [kinds of] impurity.
 28Likewise, you also appear righteous to men in appearance,d but inside, you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.
 29Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets and decorate the tombs of the righteous, 30saying, ‘If we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have partaken with them in the blood of the prophets.
’ 31Therefore, you testify to yourselves that you are children of those who killed the prophets! 32Fill up, then, the measure [of sin] of your forefathers.
 33You serpents, offspring of vipers, how will you escape the judgment of Gehennae? 34Therefore, behold, I send you prophets, wise men, and scribes.
 Some of them, you will kill and crucify; others you will flog in your synagogues and persecute from city to city.
 35Thus all the righteous blood shed on the earth will come upon you, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiahf a Some manuscripts (C, D, Δ) read “having dwelt in it” which may indicate that it is no longer the case.
 Cumin is an aromatic seed resembling caraway in flavor and appearance.
 It is used as a spice.
 c Other texts (TR/CT) read “excess” or “self-indulgence” d Or “outwardly” e Or “hell” f See Zech.
 1:1, 7.
 It is also possible that reference is made to Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada (2 Chronicles 24:20) or even to the father of John the Baptist.
 b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ whom you killed between the sanctuary and the altar.
 36Amen, I tell you: all these things will come upon this generation.
 The Lord laments over Jerusalem 37Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How often have I desired to gather your children, just as a hen gathers her brood under her wings; but you were not willing! 38Behold, your house is left to you in a desolate state.
 39For I tell you, you will not see me from now on until [the day when] you are saying, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the Name of the Lord!’”a 24 Questions about the Lord’s coming – Prophecies of calamities Jesus went out from the temple and was going on his way.
 His disciples came to him and showed him the buildings of the temple.
 2But he told them, “You see all of these things, do you not? Amen, I tell you that not one stone will be left standing on another; all will be thrown down.
” 3As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him in private, saying, “Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign of your comingb and of the end of the age?” 4Jesus answered them, “Be careful not to be led astray! 5For many will come in my Name, saying: ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will lead many people astray.
 6You will hear of wars and rumors of wars.
 Do not be troubled; all of this must take place, but the end is not yet.
 7Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be famines, plagues, and earthquakes in various places.
 8But all these things are [only] the beginning of the birth pains.
 9Then, they will deliver you up to oppression and they will kill you.
 You will be hated by all the nations for my Name’s sake.
 10Many will stumble and will betray and hate each other.
 11Many false prophets will arise and they will lead many astray.
 12Because wickedness will be multiplied, the love of many will grow cold.
 13But the one who endures to the end will be saved.
 14This Good News of the Kingdom will be preached in the whole world as a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.
 The abomination of desolation – The great tribulation 15Therefore, when you see the abomination of desolationc which was spoken about by the prophet Daniel standing in the holy place (let the reader a Psalms 118:26 / 117 LXX Greek parousi,aj c Daniel 9:27; 11:31; 12:11 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 92 understand), 16let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
 17The one who is on the housetop should not [even] go down to carry out the things that are in the house.
 18The one who is in the field should not [even] return to get his clothes.
 19But woe to those who are with child and to nursing mothers in those days! 20Pray that your flight will not be in the winter or a Sabbath day.
 21For then, there will be great oppression, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, and such as will never be again.
 22Unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved.
 But for the sake of the elect,a those days will be shortened.
 23Then, if any one tells you, ‘Behold, here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There,’ do not believe it! 24False messiahs and false prophets will arise, and they will show great signs and wonders in order to lead many astray, and if possible, even the elect.
 25Behold, I have told you this in advance.
 26If therefore people tell you, ‘Behold, he is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; or ‘Behold, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it! 27For as the lightning flashes from the east and is seen even to the west, this is how the coming of the Son of Man will be.
 The sign of the Son of Man – The glorious coming 28For wherever the bodyb is, there the eaglesc will be gathered together.
 immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light, the stars will fall from the sky, the powers of the heavens will be shaken;d 30and then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky.
e All the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heavenf with power and great glory.
 31He will send out his angels with a great sound of a trumpetg and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the sky to the other.
 29But Learning from the fig tree – The days of Noah – Hour and day unknown 32Now, learn this parable from the fig tree.
 When its branch has become tender and puts forth its leaves, you know that the summer is near.
 a Or “chosen ones” An obscure verse, perhaps a reference to the Church as the Eucharistic gathering.
 The Greek word may also convey the idea of “corpse” - see note on Luke 17:3.
 c According to St.
 John Chrysostom, this verse refers to “the multitude of the angels, of the martyrs, of all the saints.
” Some translators prefer “where the corpse is, there the vultures will gather” which is also consistent with the context (“where,” the ‘taking away’ of the wicked) and biblical imagery (Proverbs 30:17; 1 Kings 21:24; Revelation 19:21) d See Isaias (Isaiah) 13:10; 34:4 e Or “in heaven” f Or “the sky” g Compare 1 Thessalonians 4:16 b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 33Likewise, when you see all these things, know that the time is near, even at the doors.
 34Amen, I tell you that this generationa will not pass away, until all these things are accomplished.
 35Heaven and earth will pass away,b but my words will not pass away.
 36No one knows that day and hour, not even the angels of heaven,c but only my Father.
 37As in the days of Noah, so will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
 as in those days which were before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark.
 39They did not understand until the flood came and took them all away; so will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
 40Then, two men will be in the field: one will be takend and one will be left; 41two women will be grinding at the mill: one will be taken and one will be left! 42Therefore, watch, because you do not know in what hour your Lord is coming.
 43However, know this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch of the night the thief was coming, he would have watched and not allowed his house to be broken into.
 44Therefore, be ready, for it is at an hour which you do not expect that the Son of Man will come.
 38Just The faithful and wise servant 45Who then is the faithful and wise servant whom his mastere has set over his household, to give them their food in due season? 46Blessed is that servant whom his lord finds doing so when he comes.
 47Amen, I tell you that he will set him over all that he has.
 48But if that evil servant should say in his heart, ‘My lord is delaying his return,’ 49and if he should begin to beat his fellow-servants and eat and drink with the drunkards, 50the lord of that servant will come in a day when he does not expect it and in an hour when he does not know, 51and he will cut him into pieces and appoint his portion with the hypocrites.
 And there will be weeping and gnashingf of teeth.
” 25 The parable of the ten wise and foolish virgins “Then, the Kingdom of Heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
 2Five of them were foolish, and five were wise.
 3Those who were foolish took their lamps but brought no oil along with them, 4whereas the wise ones brought oil in their vessels a The word for “generation” (genea) can also be translated as “race” See Hebrews 1:10-13 c CT adds “nor the son.
” The reading of the parallel passage (Mark 13:32) is not disputed.
 d In context, this indicates being lost or destroyed.
 e Or “lord” f Or “grinding” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 94 along with their lamps.
 5Now, since the bridegroom was late, they all became tired and fell asleep.
 6But at midnight there was a cry, ‘Behold! The bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him!’ 7Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.
a 8The foolish virgins said to the wise ones, ‘Give us some of your oil because our lamps are going out.
’ 9But the wise virgins answered: ‘What if there is not enough for us and you?b You should rather go to those who sell [oil] and buy some for yourselves.
’ 10While they went away to buy [oil], the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and then the door was shut.
 11Afterwards, the other virgins also arrived and said: ‘Lord, Lord, open to us!’ 12But he answered, ‘Amen, I tell you that I do not know you!’ 13Watch therefore, for you do not know the day or the hour <that the Son of Man is coming.
>c The parable of the talents 14Indeed, the Kingdomd is like a man who was leaving for another country.
 He called his own servantse and entrusted his goods to them.
 15To one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one; to each according to his own ability.
 Then he went on his journey.
 16Immediately, the one who received five talents went off, did business with them and earned another five talents.
 17In the same way, the one who had received two gained another two.
 18But the servant who received one talent went off, dug [a hole] in the ground and hid his lord’s money.
 19After a long time, the lord of those servants returned and settled accounts with them.
 20The one who had received the five talents came forward and brought another five talents, saying: ‘Lord, you delivered to me five talents.
 Behold, I have gained another five!’ 21The lord said to the servant, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things.
 Enter into the joy of your lord!’ 22The one who had received the two talents also came forward and said, ‘Lord, you entrusted me with two talents.
 Behold, I have gained another two talents!’ a The end of the wick of an oil lamp needs to be cut off periodically to avoid having it become clogged with carbon deposits.
 The wick height is also adjusted so that the flame burns evenly and gives good light without producing a lot of smoke.
 b CT reads “it is certain that there will not be enough” c CT omits this part of the verse on strong manuscript evidence.
 d Greek “it” e Or “slaves” ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 23The lord said to this servant, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things.
 Enter into the joy of your lord!’ 24The one who had received one talent now came forward and said, ‘Lord, I knewa you that you are a hard man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter.
 25I was afraid! I went away and hid your talent in the earth.
 Behold, you have what is yours!’ 26But his lord answered, ‘You wicked and lazy servant! You understood that I reap where I did not sow, and that I gather where I did not scatter.
 27And so, you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and at my coming, I would have received it back with interest.
 28Therefore, take away the talent from this one, and give it to the one who has the ten talents.
 29For to everyone who has, [more] will be given and he will have in abundance.
 But from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away.
 30Throw out the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
’” The judgment – The sheep and the goats 31“But when the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory.
 32All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate them one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
 33He will place the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
 34Then, the King will tell those on his right hand, ‘Come, you blessed of my Father! Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you since the foundation of the world! 35For I was hungry and you gave me food to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me drink; I was a stranger and you took me in.
 36I was naked and you clothed me; I was sick and you visited me; I was in prison, and you came to me.
’ 37Then the righteous will answer him, saying: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you; or thirsty and give you a drink? 38When did we see you as a stranger and take you in; or naked, and clothe you? 39When did we see you sick, or in prison, and visit you?’ 40The King will answer them, ‘Amen, I tell you: as much as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren,b you did it to me.
’ 41Then, he will also say to those on his left hand, ‘Depart from me, you accursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels! 42For I was hungry and you gave me no food; I was thirsty and you gave me no drink; 43I was a stranger and you did not receive me; naked, and you did not clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you did not visit me.
’ a b Or “perceived” Or “brothers” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 96 44Then, they will answer: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not help you?’ 45Then he will answer them, saying: ‘Amen, I tell you: as much as you did not do it to one of the least of these, you did not do it to me.
’ 46These [ones on the left] will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.
” 26 The passion announced again - The plot against Jesus When Jesus had finished speaking, he said to his disciples, 2“You know that in two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.
” 3Then, the chief priests, the scribes, and the presbyters of the people were assembled in the court of the high priest who was called Caiaphas.
 4They were taking counsel together in order to take Jesus by deceit and kill him.
 5But they were saying, “Not during the feast, for fear that the people may cause a riot.
” A woman anoints the Lord 6Now, when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, 7a woman came to him with an alabaster jar containing very expensive fragrant oil, and she poured it on his head as he sat at the table.
 8But when his disciples saw this, they were upset and said, “Why this waste? 9This oil could have been sold for a good amount and given to the poor.
” 10However, knowing this, Jesus said to them, “Why do you trouble the woman? She has done a good deed for me! 11You always have the poor with you, but you do not always have me.
 12But by pouring this oil on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
 13Amen, I tell you: wherever this Good News is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be told, in memory of her.
” Judas betrays the Lord – Preparations for the Passover 14Then one of the Twelve who was called Judas Iscariot went to the chief priests 15and said, “What are you willing to give me in order for me to hand him over to you?” They weighed out for him thirty pieces of silver.
 16From that time on, Judasa looked for an opportunity to betray Jesus.
b a b Greek “he” Greek “him” ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 17Now, on the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Where do you want us to make preparations for you to eat the Passover?” 18He replied, “Go into the city to a certain person and tell him, ‘The Teacher says, “My time is at hand.
 I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.
”’” 19The disciples did as Jesus instructed them and they prepared the Passover.
 20When evening had come, he was reclining at the table with the Twelve.
 21As they were eating, he said, “Amen, I tell you that one of you will betray me.
” 22They were extremely distressed, and each one began to ask him, “Surely not I, Lord?” 23He answered, “He who dipped his hand with me in the dish is the one who will betray me.
 24The Son of Man goes, even as it is written of him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born.
” 25Judas, who betrayed him, said, “Surely not I, Rabbi?” And Jesus replied, “You said it.
” 26As they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks fora it, and broke it.
 He gave it to his disciples, saying, “Take, eat; this is my body.
” 27Taking theb cup, he gave thanks and gave it to them, saying, “Drink [from] it all of you, 28for this is my blood of the <new>c covenant which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.
 29But I tell you that from now on, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s Kingdom.
” 30After singing [the psalms], they went out to the Mount of Olives.
 Peter’s denial foretold – The agony in the Garden 31Then Jesus said to them, “All of you will stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.
’d 32But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.
” 33But Peter replied, “Even if all [others] will stumble because of you, I never will!” 34Jesus said to him, “Amen, I tell you that tonight, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.
” a CT and TR have “blessed” instead of “gave thanks for” CT reads “a cup” c CT omits “new” d Zechariah 13:7 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 98 35Peter said to him, “Even if I must die with you, I will not deny you!” And all the disciples said likewise.
 36Then Jesus arrived with them to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples, “Sit here, while I go there and pray.
” 37He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and he began to feel sadness and anguish.
 38Then, he said to them, “My soul is extremely sorrowful, even unto death.
a Stay here, and watch with me.
” 39He went a little forward, fell on his face, and prayed, saying, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me; nevertheless, not what I will,b but what you will.
” 40When he returned to the disciples and found them sleeping, he said to Peter, “Could you not watch with me for one hour? 41Watch and pray, so that you may not enter into temptation.
 The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak!” 42Again, a second time he went away, and prayed, saying, “My Father, if it is not possible to let this cup passc from me unless I drink it, let your will be done.
” 43Again, he came back [to the disciples] and found them asleep because their eyes were heavy.
 44He left them again, went away, and prayed a third time, saying the same words.
 45Then, he came to his disciples and told them, “Sleep on now, and take your rest.
 Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners! 46Arise, let us go! Behold, he who betrays me is near.
” Judas’ kiss of betrayal – The Lord is arrested 47While he was still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived and with him came a great crowd with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priest and presbyters of the people.
 48Now, he who betrayed Jesus gave them a sign, saying, “Whoever I kiss is the one.
 Seize him.
” 49Immediately, he came to Jesus, and said, “Hail, Rabbi!” and kissed him.
 50Jesus said to him, “Friend, why are you here?” Then, they came, laid hands on Jesus, and took him away.
 51But behold, oned of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand, drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
 52Then Jesus said to him, “Put your sword back into its place, for all those who take the sword will die by the sword.
 53Do you not think that I could ask my Father, and he would even now send me more than twelve legions of angels? 54How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled, that it must happen this way?” a Compare Sirach 37:2 Or “desire” c CT reads “if this cannot pass” d A reference to Peter (John 18:10) b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ 55In that hour, Jesus said to the crowd, “Have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me? I sat every day in the temple, teaching, and you did not arrest me [there].
 56But all this has happened so that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled.
” Then, all the disciples left him and fled.
 The Lord before the Sanhedrin 57Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas the high priest where the scribes and the presbyters were assembled.
 58But Peter followed Jesus from a distance, to the court of the high priest.
 Having entered in,a he sat with the officers to see [what would happen in] the end.
 59Now, the chief priests, the presbyters, and the whole councilb were looking for a false witness against Jesus, so that they might put him to death, 60and they found none.
 Even though many false witnesses were coming forward, they found none [valid].
 But at last, two false witnesses came forward, 61and they said, “This man said, ‘I am able to destroy the sanctuary of God, and to build it in three days.
’”c 62The high priest stood up and said to Jesus,d “Do you not have any answer? What is this that these people testify against you?” 63But Jesus remained quiet.
 The high priest told him, “I adjure you by the living God, to tell us whether you are the Christ,e the Son of God.
” 64Jesus replied, “You have said it! Nevertheless, I tell you that after this, you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Power,f coming on the clouds of heaven.
” 65Then the high priest tore his vestments and exclaimed, “He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Behold, now you have heard his blasphemy.
 66What do you think?” They answered, “He deserves death!” 67Then, they spit in his face and beat him with their fists.
 And some slapped him, 68saying, “Prophesy to us, O Christ! Who hit you?” Peter’s threefold denial 69As Peter was sitting outside in the court, a servant-girl came to him and said, “You too were with Jesus, the Galilean!” a See John 18:16 Or “Sanhedrin” c Compare John 2:19 d Greek “him” e Or “Messiah” f See Daniel 7 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 100 70But he denied it before them all, saying, “I do not know what you are talking about.
” 71When he had gone out onto the porch, someone else saw him and said to those who were there, “This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth.
” 72Again, Peter denied it with an oath, “I do not know the man!” 73After a little while those who stood by came and said to Peter, “Surely you are also one of them, for your speech reveals that you are [a Galilean].
” 74Then, he began to curse and swear, “I do not know the man!” Immediately, the rooster crowed.
 75Then Peter remembered the word which Jesus had said to him, “Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.
” He went out and wept bitterly.
 27 The Lord before Pilate – Judas hangs himself In the morning, all the chief priests and the presbyters of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death; 2they bound him, led him away, and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor.
 3When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus was condemned, he felt remorse and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and presbyters, 4saying, “I have sinned by betraying innocenta blood.
” But they answered, “What is that to us? You see to it.
” 5He threw the pieces of silver in the sanctuary, and departed.
 He then went away and hanged himself.
b 6The chief priests took the pieces of silver and said, “It is not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood.
” 7They took counsel and bought the potter’s field with the money, [as a place] to bury strangers.
 8Therefore, that field was called “The Field of Blood” even to this day.
 9Thus, what was spoken through Jeremiahc the prophet was fulfilled: They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him upon whom a price had been set, whom some of the children of Israel priced, and they gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord commanded me.
d a A few manuscripts read “righteous blood” See footnote for Acts 1:18 c A few manuscripts read “Zecharias / Zachariah” or “Isaias / Isaiah” d Zechariah 11:12-13; Jeremiah 19:1-13; 32:6-9 b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ Pilate questions the Lord – The Lord condemned to be crucified 11Now, Jesus stood before the governor and the governor asked him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” Jesus answered, “And so, you say.
” 12But when he was accused by the chief priests and the presbyters, he answered nothing.
 13Pilate then said to him, “Do you not hear how many charges they present against you?” 14Jesus gave him no answer, not even one word, so that the governor was astonished.
 15Now, on the [occasion of the] feast, the governor had the custom to release one prisoner to the crowd, whoever they desired.
 16At that time, they had a notable prisoner called Barabbas.
a 17When they were gathered, Pilate asked them, “Who do you want me to release to you? Barabbas,b or Jesus, who is called Christ?” 18For he perceived that it was because of envy that they had arrested him.
 19While Pilate was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent a note to him that said, “Have nothing to do with that righteous man! Today, I have suffered many things in a dream because of him.
” 20Now, the chief priests and the presbyters convinced the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus done away with.
 21But the governor asked them, “Which one of the two do you want me to release to you?” They said, “Barabbas!” 22Pilate said to them, “What then shall I do to Jesus, who is called Christ?” They all replied, “Let him be crucified!” 23The governor asked, “Why? What evil has he done?” But they cried out loudly, saying, “Let him be crucified!” 24And so, when Pilate saw that nothing was being gained, but rather that a riot was starting, he took water and washed his hands in front of the crowd, saying, “I am innocent of the blood of this righteousc man.
 You see to it.
” 25All the people answered, “May his blood be on us, and on our children!” 26At this, Pilated released Barabbas to them, but had Jesus flogged and delivered to be crucified.
 a CT reads “Jesus Barabbas” CT reads “Jesus Barabbas” c Or “just” – CT omits this word.
 d Greek “he” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 102 Roman soldiers mock the Lord – The crown of thorns 27Then, the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the praetorium and gathered the whole garrison against him.
 28They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him.
 29They made a crown of thorns and placed it on his head, and a reed in his right hand.
 They knelt down before him and mocked him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” 30They also spat on him, took the reed and struck him on the head.
 31When they had mocked him, they removed the robe from him, put his [own] clothes on him and led him away to crucify him.
 Simon of Cyrene – The way to Golgotha – The crucifixion of the Lord 32As they were coming out, the soldiersa found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they compelledb him to go with them and to carry the cross.
 33They arrived to a place called “Golgotha,” which means, “The place of a skull.
” 34They gave him sour winec mixed with gall to drink, but having tasted it, he would not drink.
 35After crucifying him, they divided his clothing among them, casting lots.
’d 36Then, the soldierse sat and watched him.
 37They placed above his head the accusation against him in these words, “THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
” Matthew Mark Mt 27:37 Mk 15:26 ουτος εστιν ιησους ο βασιλευς των ιουδαιων ο βασιλευς των ιουδαιων This is Jesus, the King of the Jews The King of the Jews Luke John Lk 23:38 Jn 19:19-20 ουτος εστιν ο βασιλευς των ιουδαιων HIC·EST·REX·IVDÆORVM היהודים מלך זהו היהודים ומלך הנצרי ישוע ιησους ο ναζωραιος ο βασιλευς των ιουδαιων IESVS·NAZARENVS·REX·IVDÆORVM This is the King of the Jews Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews 38Two rebels were also crucified with him, one on his right hand and one on the left.
 39Those who passed by blasphemed him, shaking their heads 40and saying, “You who [would] destroy the sanctuary and rebuild it in a Greek “they” See Matthew 5:41 c Or “vinegar” - CT simply reads “wine” d TR adds “so that what had been spoken by the prophet might be fulfilled: ‘They divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast lots.
” [see Psalms 22:18 / 21 LXX and John 19:24] e Greek “they” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of God, come down from the cross!” 41Likewise the chief priests also mocked him, with the scribes, the presbyters and the Pharisees,a saying, 42“He saved others, but he cannot save himself! If he is the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him! 43He trusts in God! Let God deliver him now, if he wants him; for he said, ‘I am the Son of God.
’”b 44The rebels also who were crucified with him reviled him as well [and] in the same way.
 The death of the Lord – Miraculous signs 45From the sixth hour,c there was darkness over all the landd until the ninth hour.
 About the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?” That is, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”f e 46 47Some of those who stood there heard it and said, “This man is calling Elias (Elijah)!” 48Immediately, one of them ran to take a sponge; he filled it with vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.
 49But the others said, “Let him be.
 Let us see whether Elias (Elijah) comes to save him.
”g 50Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and yielded up his spirit.
 51Behold, the veil of the sanctuary was torn in two from the top to the bottom.
 The earth quaked and the rocks were split.
 52The tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised 53and came out of the tombs after his resurrection.
 (They entered into the holy city and appeared to many).
 54Now, when the centurion and those who were with him watching Jesus saw the earthquake and the things that were taking place, they became extremely fearful and said, “Truly, this was the Son of God!” 55Many women who had followed Jesus from Galilee to serve him were there, watching from afar.
 56Among them were Mary Magdalene, Maryh the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
 a CT and TR omit “and the Pharisees” Compare Wisdom 2:12-24 (especially verse 18) c Noon d Or “earth” e 3:00 pm f Opening verse of Psalms 22:1 / 21 LXX (ynIT'b.
z:[] hm'l' yliae ylia) g Some manuscripts (including א, B, C, L – see table introduction to understand these manuscript abbreviations) add “Another [soldier], taking a spear, pierced his side, and water and blood came out” - (see John 19:34).
 These manuscripts can be taken as a strong attestation.
 However, this is omitted in A, D, W, Δ, Θ and in the Byzantine tradition.
 h See Appendix E b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 104 The burial of the Lord – Joseph of Arimathea – Events at the tomb 57When evening came, a rich man from Arimathaea named Joseph, who himself was also a disciple of Jesus, arrived.
 58This man went to Pilate, asked for the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave order that the body be delivered [to him].
 59Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, 60and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had carved out in the rock.
 He then rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb and departed.
 61Mary Magdalene was there, and also the other Mary, sitting opposite the tomb.
 62On the next day which was the day after the day of preparation,a the chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate 63and said, “Lord, we remember what that deceiver said when he was still alive: ‘After three days, I will rise again.
’ 64Therefore, give orders that the tomb be made secure until the third day, for fear that his disciples may come at night, steal him away, and then tell the people, ‘He is risen from the dead!’ This last deception would be worse than the first.
” 65Pilate said to them, “You have a guard.
 Go, make it as secure as you can.
” so, they went off in order to made the tomb secure, sealing the stone and setting a watch.
 66And 28 The Lord’s resurrection Afterb the Sabbath, as it began to dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.
 2Behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven and came to roll away the stone from the door, and [the angel] sat on it.
 3His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow.
 4Out of fear, the guards were shaken and became as dead.
 5The angel told the women, “Do not be afraid! I know that you seek Jesus who has been crucified.
 6He is not here, for he is risen, just as he said.
 Come, see the place where the Lordc was lying.
 7Go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has risen from the dead, and behold, he goes before you into Galilee; there you will see him.
’ Behold, this is my message for you.
” 8They departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to report it to his disciples.
 9As they went to tell his disciples,d behold, Jesus met them, saying, “Rejoice!” a Greek paraskeuh,n Or “at the end of” c CT has “he” instead of “the Lord” d CT omits “As they went to tell his disciples” b ACCORDING TO MATTHEW - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΝ They came forward and took hold of his feet, and expressed adoration toa him.
 10Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid! Go tell my brethrenb that they should go into Galilee.
 There, they will see me.
” The (Jewish) guards make their report 11While they were going, behold, some of the guards came into the city and told the chief priests all the things that had happened.
 12When they were assembled with the presbyters in order to take counsel, they gave the soldiers a large amount of silver, 13with these words, “Say that his disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept.
 14If this comes to the governor’s ears, we will persuade him and make you free of worry.
” 15And so, they took the money and did as they were told.
 This story is widespread among the Jews until this day.
 The Great Commission 16The eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had directed them.
 17When they saw him, they expressed adoration [toc him],d but theye doubted.
f 18Jesus came to them and said, “All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth.
 19Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, 20teaching them to observe all the things that I have commanded you.
 Behold, I am with you always, even to the end of the age.
” <Amen! >g a proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) b Or “brothers” c proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) d There is actually no object for the action, but it may be inferred that Jesus is the one to whom proskuneo is offered here.
 e The Greek could also be translated “but some doubted,” but the translation chosen for the main text is more literal.
 f NJB renders the Greek verb as “hesitated” g CT omits “Amen” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT Entrance into Jerusalem (Feast: Palm Sunday) By Theophanis the Cretan, 1567, now on Mount Athos 106 ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ Transfiguration of Christ (Feast: August 6) Constantinople, 12th century, (Now at St.
 Catherine's Monastery, Sinai) THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 108 (ACCORDING TO) MARK (ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ) 1 The ministry of John the Baptist – The Lord’s baptism The beginning of the Good News of Jesus Christ, the Son of Goda.
 2As it is written in the prophets:b Behold, I send my messenger before your face,c who will prepare your way before you.
d The voice of one crying in the wilderness:e ‘Make ready the way of the Lord! Make his paths straight!’f 4John came baptizing in the wilderness and preaching the baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
 5All the country of Judea and all those from Jerusalem went out to him.
 They were baptized by John in the Jordan river, confessing their sins.
 6John was clothed with camel’s hair, a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
 7He preached, saying, “He who comes after me is more powerful than I, and I am not worthy to kneel down and untie the strap of his sandals.
 8I baptized you ing water, but he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit.
” 9It happened, in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and he was baptized by John in the Jordan.
 10Immediately coming up from the water, he saw the heavens torn openh and the Spirit descending on him like a dove.
 11A voice came out of the heavens, “You are my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
” a The words “the Son of God” are omitted in some manuscripts and therefore bracketed in CT Based on various manuscripts including א, B, L, and Δ, CT reads “in Isaias (Isaiah) the prophet.
” This is a mixed quotation of two prophets (see notes below).
 c NT agrees with MT against LXX d Malachi 3:1 e NT agrees with LXX against MT f Isaias (Isaiah) 40:3 g The Greek word (en) translated here as “in” could also be translated as “with” in some contexts.
 h Compare Mark 15:38 b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ The temptation in the desert – Ministry in Galilee – The first four disciples 12At once, the Spirit drove him out into the desert.
 13He was there, in the desert for forty days, being tempted by Satan.
 He was with the wild animals and the angels were ministeringa to him.
b 14Now, after John had been arrested, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Good News of the Kingdom of God, 15and saying, “The time is fulfilled! The Kingdom of God is at hand! Repent and believe in the Good News.
” 16Passing along by the sea of Galilee, Jesus saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
 17Jesus said to them, “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.
” 18Immediately, they left their nets and followed him.
 19Going on a little further from there, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who were also in a boat, mending the nets.
 20At once, he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, and they began to follow him.
 21They went into Capernaum, and on the Sabbath day, Jesusc entered into the synagogue and taught.
 22The people were astonished at his teaching because he taught them as having authority, not like the scribes.
 23Just then, there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit who cried out, 24“Away! What do we have to do with you, Jesus, you Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are: the Holy One of God!” 25Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be quiet, and come out of him!” 26The unclean spirit, convulsing the man and crying with a loud voice, came out of him.
 27The people were all so amazed that they asked each other, “What is this? A new teaching? For with authority he commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him!” 28The newsd about him went out immediately everywhere into the entire regione of Galilee and its surrounding area.
 The healing of Peter’s mother in law – Other healings 29As soon as they left the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, [along] with James and John.
 30Now, Simon’s mother-in-law lay sick with a fever, and immediately, they told him about her.
 31Jesus came, took her by the hand, and raised her up.
 The fever left her and she began to serve them.
 32At evening, when the sun had set, they brought him a The Greek dihko,noun can mean “to serve / wait on / provide for / serve as deacon” Compare Revelation 4:7,9; 5:1 c Greek “he” d Or “report” e Or “district” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 110 all who were sick or possessed by demons.
 33The entire city was gathered at the door.
 34He healed many who were afflicted with various diseases and cast out many demons.
 However, he did not allow the demons to speak because they knew him.
 35Early in the morning, while it was still dark, Jesus arose, left the house, went out into a deserted place and prayed there.
 36Simon and those with him followed Jesus.
a 37When they found him, they told him, “Everyone is looking for you!” 38He replied, “Let us go somewhere else, into the next towns, so that I may preach there also, for this is why I came.
” 39He went into their synagogues throughout all of Galilee, preaching and casting out demons.
 The healing of a leper 40A leper came to him, begging to him, kneeling down before him, and saying, “If you want to, you can make me clean!” 41Being moved with compassion,b Jesus stretched out his hand, touched the man, and said to him, “I want to! Be made clean.
” 42When Jesus said this, the leprosy immediately departed from the leperc and he was made clean.
 43Jesus strictly warned him, and sent him out at once, 44saying, “See that you do not say anything to anyone, but go and show yourself to the priest.
 Offer for your cleansing what Moses instructed, as a testimony to them.
” 45However, the man went off and began to proclaim it freely and to spread news about this matter, so that Jesus could no longer enter into a city openly.
 Instead, he remained outside in deserted places and people came to him from everywhere.
 2 The healing of a paralytic After some time, when Jesus returned to Capernaum, it was heard that he was in the house.
 2Immediately, many people gathered so that there was no more room, not even around the door.
 As Jesus was preaching the word to them, 3four men came, carrying a paralytic to him.
 4Since they could not come near Jesusd because of the crowd, they removed the roof where he was.
 When they had broken it up, they let down the mat which the a Greek “him” CT also gives the following alternative reading: “Becoming angry, Jesus…” which was mentioned by St.
 Basil and St.
 Ambrose (also Mark 3:5; 10:14).
 c Greek “him” d Greek “him” b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ paralytic was lying on.
 5Seeing their faith, Jesus said to the paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiven you.
” 6But there were some of the scribes sitting there, and they reasoned in their hearts, 7“Why does this man speak blasphemies like that? Who can forgive sins except God alone?” 8Immediately, Jesus perceived in his spirit that they were reasoning within themselves in this way.
 He asked them, “Why do you reason these things in your hearts? 9Which is easier, to tell the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Arise, take up your bed, and walk?’ 10But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins” - he said to the paralytic - 11“I tell you, arise, take up your mat, and go to your house!” 12The man arose, and at once took up the mat, and went out in front of everyone.
 The people were all amazed and glorified God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this!” The calling of Levi (Matthew) – About fasting 13Jesus went out again by the seaside.
 The crowd came to him and he taught them.
 14As Jesusa was passing by, he saw Levi,b the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the tax office, and he said to him, “Follow me!” And Levi arose and followed Jesus.
 15It then happened that Jesus was reclining at the table in Levi’s house, and many tax collectors and sinners sat down with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they followed him.
 16The scribes and the Pharisees, when they saw that Jesusc was eating with sinners and tax collectors, said to his disciples, “Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?” 17When Jesus heard it, he replied to them, “Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do.
 I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
”d 18John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and they came to ask him, “Why do John’s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not?” 19Jesus told them, “Can the friends of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast! 20But the days will come when the bridegroom will be a Greek “he” Also called Matthew c Greek “he” d CT omits “to repentance” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 112 taken away from them, and then, they will ast in that day.
 21No one sews a piece of new cloth on an old garment, or else the patch shrinks and tears away from the old, and a worse hole is made.
 22No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, the wine will pour out and the skins will be destroyed! Instead, new wine is put into fresh wineskins.
” Plucking grains on the Sabbath – The Lord of the Sabbath 23Now, it happened that he was going on the Sabbath day through the field of grain, and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck some heads of grain.
 24The Pharisees asked Jesus,a “Behold, why do they do what is not lawful on the Sabbath day?” 25Jesus replied, “Have you never read what David and those with him did, when he had need and was hungry? 26How he entered into the house of God in the days of Abiatharb the high priest, and ate the bread of the presence,c which is not lawful [for anyone] except for the priests to eat.
 And [how] Davidd also gave it to those who were with him?” 27Jesus said to them, “The Sabbath was made for humankind, not humankinde for the Sabbath! 28Therefore, the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.
” 3 The healing of a man with a withered hand – Other healings Again, Jesus entered into the synagogue, and there was a man who had a withered hand.
 2The Phariseesf were watching Jesusg to see if he would heal the man on the Sabbath day, so that they might accuse him.
 3Jesus said to the man who had his hand withered, “Stand up!” 4He then said to those who were watching, “Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath day, or [is it lawful] to do harm? Is it lawful to save a life or to kill?” But they remained silent.
 5After looking around at them with anger and being grieved at the hardening of their hearts, Jesus said to the man, “Stretch out your hand!” The man stretched it out, and his hand was restored as healthy as the other.
 6The Pharisees went out and immediately began to conspire with the Herodians against Jesus,h [discussing] how they might get rid of him.
 a Greek “him” See “Mark 2:26 and the Problem of Abiathar” by Daniel B.
 Wallace c Or “show bread” d Greek “he” e Here, the Greek a;nqrwpoõ is clearly inclusive f Greek “they” g Greek “him” h Greek “him” b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ 7Jesus withdrew to the sea with his disciples, and a great crowd followed him from Galilee, Judea, 8Jerusalem, Idumaea beyond the Jordan, and also from around Tyre and Sidon.
 Hearing what great things Jesus was doing, a great multitude of people came to him.
 9Jesus instructed his disciples to have a little boat stay near him because of the crowd, so that they would not press on him.
 10For he had healed many people, so that as many as had diseases pressed on him in order to touch him.
 11The unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, fell down before him and cried, “You are the Son of God!” 12He sternly warned them that they should not make him known.
 The commission of the Twelve 13Jesus went up into the mountain and called to himself those he wanted and they came to him.
 14He appointed twelve to be with him, to send them out to preach, 15and to have authority to heal sicknesses and to cast out demons.
 [They were:] 16Simon, to whom he gave the name Peter; 17James the son of Zebedee and John, the brother of James, to whom he gave the name Boanerges which means ‘Sons of Thunder;’ 18Andrew; Philip; Bartholomew; Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus;a Thaddaeus; Simon the Zealot;b 19and Judas Iscariot, who was to betray him.
 The Lord accused of casting out demons by Satan – The unforgivable sin Jesus returned [to his] home and 20again, the crowd assembled, so much that they could not even eat bread.
 21When his own [friends]c heard it, they came to take charge of him, saying, “He is insane!” 22The scribes who came down from Jerusalem said, “He is possessed by Beelzebul,” and, “He is casting out demons by the [authority of the] prince of the demons!” 23Jesus called them and spoke to them in parables: “How can Satan cast out Satan? 24If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
 25If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
 26If Satan has risen up against himself and is divided, he cannot stand, but has [come to] an end.
 27But no one can enter into the house of a strong man in order to plunder it, unless he first bindsd the strong man.
 Then he will plunder his house.
 28Amen, all human sins will be forgiven, and all the blasphemies ever uttered; 29but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin.
”30[He spoke these words] because they had said, “He has an unclean spirit!” a Compare 2:13 Greek Si,mwna to.
n Kananai/on c Or possibly “relatives” d Compare Revelation 20:2 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 114 The Lord’s true family 31His mother and his brothersa came and, standing outside, sent in a message asking for him.
 32A large group was sitting around him, and they told him, “Behold, your mother and your brothersb are standing outside, looking for you.
” 33He answered them, “Who are my mother and my brothers?” 34Looking around at those who sat around him, he said, “Behold, my mother and my brothers! 35For whoever does the will of God is my brother, and my sister, and mother.
” 4 The parable of the sower – About the use of parables Again he began to teach by the seaside.
 A great crowd was gathered close to him, so that he got into a boat in the lake and sat down while the people were on the shore.
 2He taught them many things in parables, saying, 3“Listen! A farmer went out to sow.
 4As he sowed, some seed fell by the road and the birdsc came and devoured it.
 5Others fell on the rocky ground where it had little soil and it sprang up right away.
 Because the soil was shallow, 6when the sun came, it was scorched; and since it had no root, it withered away.
 7Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up, choked it and it produced no fruit.
 8Others fell into the good ground and produced fruit, growing up and increasing, some multiplying thirty times, some sixty times, and some a hundred times.
” 9Then Jesus said, “Anyone who has ears for listening should listen!” 10When he was alone, those who were around him together with the Twelve asked him about the parables.
 11Jesus told them, “The mystery of the Kingdom of God is given to you, but to those who are outside, everything comes in parables, 12so that ‘seeing they may [indeed] see, and [yet] not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and [yet] not understand; otherwise they might repent and be forgiven.
’”d 13Jesus asked them, “Do you not understand this parable? How then will you understand all the [other] parables? 14The farmer sows the word.
 15Some people are like the seed sowed by the edge of the road where the word is sown.
 As soon as they have heard, Satan comes and takes away the word which had been sown in them.
 16Likewise, those who are sown on the rocky places are those who receive the word with joy as soon as they hear a See Appendix E Some manuscripts add “your sisters.
” See Appendix E c TR adds “of the air” d Isaias (Isaiah) 6:9-10.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ it.
 17But they have no root in themselves and only last for a short while.
 When oppression or persecution comes because of the word, they immediately stumble.
 18Others are those who are sown among the thorns.
 These are people who have heard the word, 19but the worries of this age, the deceit of wealth, and the desire to possess things enter in and choke the word.
 Thus, it produces no fruit.
 20The seeds which were sown on the good ground are those who hear the word, accept it, and bear fruit.
 Some multiply thirty times, some sixty, and some a hundred times!” The example of the lamp – Nothing hidden 21Jesus said to them, “Is a lamp brought in to be placed under a basketa or under a bed? Is it not placed on a stand? 22For there is nothing hidden that should not be revealed,b and nothing was made secret that should not come to light.
 23Anyone who has ears for listening should listen!” 24He also told them, “Pay attention to what you hear! With whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you, and more will be given to those who hear.
 25For whoever has will receive even more, but to the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
” The parable of the growing seed – The mustard seed 26Jesus said, “The Kingdom of God is as if a man would scatter seed on the ground, 27and then go to sleep.
 Night and day, whether he sleeps or rises, the seed springs up and grows, even if he does not know how.
 28For the earth bears fruit: first the blade comes, then the head, then the full grain in the head.
 29But when the fruit is ripe, at once the man pulls out his sickle, because the harvest has come.
” 30Jesus said, “What can we compare the Kingdom of God to? Or with what parable will we illustrate it? 31It is like a grain of mustard seed sown in the ground! Even though it is smaller than all the seeds on earth, 32when it is sown and grows up, it becomes greater than all garden plants! It puts out great branches and the birds of the sky can find shelter under its shade.
” 33Using many parables like these, he spoke the word to the people, as much as they were able to hear it.
 34He would not speak to them except in parables, but to his own disciples, he explained everything in private.
 a b Literally, a modion, a dry measuring basket containing about 9 liters The Greek expression has received a number of possible translations, notably “whatever is hidden is meant to be disclosed” (NIV), “there is nothing hidden, except to be disclosed” (NRSV), “there is nothing hidden except to be made visible” (NAB) and “there is nothing hidden, but it must be disclosed” (NJB).
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 116 The calming of the storm 35That day, when evening came, Jesusa said to them, “Let us cross over to the other side.
” 36Leaving the crowd behind, his disciples took him with them in the boat, just as he was; and there were also other small boats with him.
 37A great windstorm arose, and the waves beat into the boat, so much that the boat was already filling.
 38But Jesus was in the stern, asleep on the cushion.
 They woke him up and told him, “Teacher, do you not care that we are perishing?” 39Jesusb awoke and rebuked the wind, saying to the sea, “Peace! Be still!” The wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
 40He then asked his disciples,c “Why are you so afraid? How is it that you have no faith?” 41They were greatly afraid and said to one another, “Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?” 5 The healing of the demoniac – The demons (legion) sent in the pigs They arrived on the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.
 2As soon as Jesus came out of the boat, a man with an unclean spirit met him out of the [nearby] tombs.
 3This mand lived in the tombs and no one was able to bind him, not even with chains.
 4(He had often been chained hand and foot but had torn the chains apart and broken the footshackles in pieces).
 Indeed, nobody had the strength to control him.
 5Night and day, he remained in the tombs and the mountains, howling and cutting himself with stones.
 6When this man saw Jesus from afar, he ran and expressed adoration toe him.
 7He cried out with a loud voice, “What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? By God’s Name, do not torment me!” 8(For Jesus had just said to him, “Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!”) 9Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” He answered, “My name is Legion, for we are many!” 10He implored Jesus not to expel them from the earth.
f 11Now, there was a great herd of pigs feeding on the mountainside.
 12All the demons begged him, saying, “Send us into the pigs, so that we may enter into them.
” a Greek “he” Greek “he” c Greek “them” d Greek “he” e proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) f Or “send them out of the land” b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ 13At once, Jesus gave them permission.
 The unclean spirits came out and entered into the pigs.
 The herd of about two thousand rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and they were drowned in the sea.
 14Those who fed them ran away and told the story in the [nearby] town and countryside.
 The people then came to see what had taken place.
 15They came to Jesus and saw the man who had been possessed by demons sitting, clothed, and in his right mind.
 This was the very man who had [been possessed by] the legion [of demons,] and they were afraid.
 16The eyewitnesses reported to them what had happened to the man who was possessed by demons and [also] to the pigs.
 17Then, they began to beg Jesus to leave their region.
 18As Jesus was entering into the boat, the man who had been possessed by demons begged to be allowed to stay with him.
 19But Jesus did not allow him, saying to him, “Go to your house, to your friends, and tell them what great things the Lord has done for you, and how he had mercy on you.
” 20The man went off on his way, and began to proclaim in Decapolis how Jesus had done great things for him, and everyone was amazed.
 Jairus’ daughter is raised – The healing of the woman with the issue of blood 21When Jesus had crossed back over in the boat to the other side, a great crowd was gathered to [welcome] him and he remained by the seashore.
 22Behold, one of the rulers of the synagogue whose name was Jairus came forward.
 Seeing Jesus, he fell at his feet, 23and profusely begged him, saying, “My little daughter is at the point of death! Please come and lay your hands on her, so that she may be made healthy and live.
” 24Jesus went with him, and a great multitude followed him, pressing upon him on all sides.
 25There was a certain woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years.
 26She had endured much at the hands of many physicians and spent all that she had.
 Yet, she was not feeling better but worse.
 27Having heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his clothes.
 28For she thought, “If I just touch his clothes, I will be made well!” 29And immediately, the flow of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction.
 30Jesus, perceiving in himself at once that power had gone out from him, turned around in the crowd and asked, “Who touched my clothes?” 31His disciples said to him, “You see the multitude pressing against you, and you ask, ‘Who touched me?’” 32Jesus looked around to see the woman who had done this.
 33But she, fearing and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came forward and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 118 34Jesus said to her, “Daughter, your faith has made you well! Go in peace, and be cured of your disease.
” 35While he was still speaking, people came from the house of the ruler of the synagogue, saying, “Your daughter is dead! Why bother the Teacher any longer?” 36But when Jesus heard the message, he immediately said to the ruler of the synagogue, “Do not be afraid, only believe!” 37He allowed no one to follow him, except Peter, James, and John (the brother of James).
 38He arrived at the synagogue ruler’s house, and saw a commotion with weeping and great wailing.
 39When Jesus had entered in [the house], he said to them, “Why do you make a commotion and weep? The child is not dead, but asleep!” 40At this, they laughed at him.
 But Jesus,a having put them all out, took the father of the child, her mother, and those who were with him, and went into the room where the child was lying.
 41Taking the child by the hand, Jesus said to her, “Talitha cumi!” which means, “Little girl, I tell you, get up!” 42Immediately, the girl (who was twelve years old) rose up and began to walk.
 At this, they were overcome with amazement.
 43He strictly ordered them that no one should know this and told them to give her something to eat.
 6 Rejected in Nazareth Jesusb left that place and came into his own country, and his disciples followed him.
 2When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue.
 Hearing him, many were astonished, saying, “Where did this man get these things?” and, “What is the wisdom that is given to this man, that such powerful works come about by his hands? 3Is this not the carpenter, the son of Mary,c and brother of James, Joses, Judah, and Simon? Are not his sisters here with us?” And they rejected him.
 4Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and among his own relatives, and in his own house.
” 5He could not perform any miracles there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick people and healed them.
 6He was astonished because of their unbelief.
 The sending of the Twelve He went around the villages, teaching.
 7Calling to himself the Twelve, he began to send them out two by two and gave them authority over the a Greek “he” Greek “he” c See Appendix E b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ unclean spirits.
 8He told them to take nothing for their journey, except for a staff: no bread, no wallet, no money in their purse.
 9He also told them to wear sandals and not put on two tunics.
 10He said to them, “Wherever you enter into a house, stay there until you depart from the area.
 11If any place does not welcome you and if people refuse to listen to you, as you walk away, shake off the dust under your feet as a testimony against them.
a Amen, I can tell you that in the day of judgment, things will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for that city!” 12They went out and preached that people should repent.
 13They also cast out many demons and anointed with oil many people who were sick and healed them.
 Herod and the death of John the Baptist 14King Herod heard this report, for Jesus’ name had become well-known, and he said, “John the Baptizer has risen from the dead! This is why these powers are at work in him!” 15But others said, “He is Elias (Elijah).
” Others said, “He is a prophet, or like one of the prophets!” 16But when he heard this, Herod said, “This is John whom I beheaded.
 He has risen from the dead!” 17For Herod himself had given order that John be arrested and he had him chained in prison.
 This was for the sake of Herodias, the [former] wife of his brother Philip, for Herod had married her.
 18John had said to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife!” 19Herodias became furious against John and desired to kill him, but she could not 20because Herod feared John.
 He knew that John was a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe.
 When he had heard Johnb speak, he was greatly perplexed, and yet he liked to listen to him.
 21An opportunity came when on his birthday Herod gave a banquet for his nobles, high officers, and for the leading figures of Galilee.
 22When the daughter of Herodias came in and danced, she pleased Herod and those sitting with him.
 The king said to the girl, “Ask me whatever you want, and I will give it to you!” 23He swore to her, “Whatever you shall ask of me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom!” 24She went out and said to her mother, “What shall I ask?” Herodias answered, “The head of John the Baptizer!” 25At once, the girl hurried to the king and said, “I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptizer on a platter.
” 26The king was extremely sorry, but for the sake of his oaths and because of his dinner guests, he did not wish to deny her.
 27Immediately, the king a b CT omits this sentence Greek “him” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 120 sent out a soldier of his guard and commanded [him] to bring John’s head.
 The soldier went off and beheaded John in the prison.
 28He brought the Baptist’sa head on a platter and gave it to the girl, and she gave it to her mother.
 29When John’sb disciples heard this, they came, took hisc body, and laid it in a tomb.
 The report of the Twelve – The feeding of the five thousand 30The apostles came back together around Jesus and told him all that they had done and taught.
 31Because there were many [people] coming and going, the apostles did not even have time to eat.
 Jesus then said to them, “You should go away into a deserted place and rest for a while.
” 32They went away in the boat to a deserted place by themselves.
 33The multitudes saw them going away and many recognized Jesus.
 People rushed there on foot from all the [surrounding] cities and arrived before the disciples,d arriving there ahead of them.
 34Jesus came out, saw a great crowd, and he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd.
 He then began to teach them many things.
 35When it was late in the day, Jesus’e disciples came to him and said, “This place is deserted and it is late in the day! 36Send them away so that they may go into the surrounding countryside and villages to buy bread, for they have nothing to eat.
” 37But Jesus answered them, “You give them something to eat!” They asked him, “Shall we go and buy two hundred denariif worth of bread, and give them something to eat?” 38Jesus replied, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.
” When they had found out, they said, “Five loaves and two fish.
” 39Jesus gave them instructions that everyone should sit down in groups on the green grass, 40and people sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.
 41He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed and broke the loaves.
 He then gave it to his disciples to set before the people, and he distributed the two fish among them all.
 42Everyone ate and was satisfied, 43and the disciples collected twelve baskets full of broken pieces and of the [leftover] fish.
 44Those who ate the loaves numbered about five thousand men.
 a Greek “his” Greek “his” c Greek “John’s” d Greek “them” e Greek “his” f 200 denarii was about 7 or 8 months wages for an agricultural laborer.
 b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ 45At once, Jesusa made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself sent the crowd away.
 46After he had taken leave of them, he went up the mountain to pray.
 The walking on the water – At Gennesaret 47When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the sea while Jesusb was alone on the shore.
 48Seeing the disciples hard pressed in their rowing as the wind was against them, he came to them when it was about the fourth watch of the night.
 Jesusc was walking on the sea and would have passed by them, 49but when they saw him walking on the sea, they thought that it was a ghost and cried out.
 50They all saw him and were troubled, but immediately, Jesus spoke with them and said, “Rejoice! It is I!d Do not be afraid!” 51He got into the boat with them and the wind ceased.
 They were utterly astonished and marveled greatly 52because they had not understood about the [miracle of the] loaves, but their hearts were hardened.
 53After crossing over, they landed at Gennesaret and moored the boat to the shore.
 54When they came out of the boat, the people immediately recognized Jesus.
e 55They swarmed that whole region and began to bring the sick on mats to wherever they heard that he was.
 56Wherever he entered, into villages, cities, or into the country, people laid the sick in the marketplaces and begged him to be able to touch just the fringe of his garment; and as many as touched him were made well.
 7 Traditions that nullify the word of God Then the Pharisees and some of the scribes came from Jerusalem and gathered to [see] Jesus.
f 2When they saw that some of his disciples were eating bread with defiledg (that is, unwashed) hands,h they found fault.
 3(For the Pharisees and all the Jews hold to the tradition of the presbyters and do not eat unless they wash their hands and forearms.
 4[Also], they do not eat when they return from the marketplace unless they [first] bathe themselves; and there are many other things which they have received and observe: washings of cups, pitchers, bronze vessels, and couches.
) 5The Pharisees and the scribes asked him, “Why is it that your disciples do not a Greek “he” Greek “he” c Greek “he” d Or “I AM!” e Greek “him” f Greek “him” g Or “(ritually) impure” h CT omits the rest of the verse b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 122 live bya the tradition of the presbyters, but eat their bread with unwashed hands?” 6Jesus answered them, “Well did Isaias (Isaiah) prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written: ‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
 7 But in vain do they express adorationb before me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.
’c 8Indeed, you set aside the commandment of God and hold fastd to human tradition —the washing of pitchers and cups, and you do many other such things.
” 9He said to them, “How ingeniously do you reject the commandment of God in order to keep your tradition! 10For Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother;’f and, ‘Whoever speaks evil of father or mother should be put to death.
’g 11But you say, ‘If a man tells his father or mother, “Whatever [support] you might have received from me is Corbanh (that is, dedicated to God)”’ 12then you no longer allow him to do anything for his father or mother.
 13Thus, you nullify the word of God by your tradition which you have handed down.
i And you do many [other] things like this.
” e 14Jesus called the entire crowd to himself and said to them, “Hear me, all of you, and understand! 15There is nothing outside a person that by going in can defile; it is what comes out of a person that defiles the person.
 16Anyone who has ears for listening should listen!”j 17When he had entered into a house away from the crowd, his disciples asked him about the parable.
 18He said to them, “Are you also without understanding? Do you not perceive that whatever goes into someone from the outside cannot defile that person 19because it does not go into his heart but into the stomach, and then into the sewer (thus he declared all foods to be clean)k?” 20He said, “What comes out of a person is what defiles that a Or “walk according to” proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) c Isaias (Isaiah) 29:13.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT d Or “observe / carry out” e By contrast with divine or apostolic tradition of God which by nature cannot contradict God’s commandments f Exodus 20:12; Deuteronomy 5:16 g Exodus 21:17; Leviticus 20:9 h Corban is a Hebrew word for an offering devoted to God.
 i Note that the word tradition refers to a content (or teaching) as well as a process of transmission.
 j This verse is only found in the Byzantine tradition.
 CT omits this verse.
 k Or “thus purging all foods” b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ person.
 21Indeed, it is from within, out of human hearts, that evil thoughts proceed: sexual immorality, theft, murder, 22adultery, greed,a wickedness, deceit, lustful desires, an evil eyeb, blasphemyc, pride, and foolishness.
d 23All these evil things come from within and make a person unclean.
” The faith of a Canaanite Woman – Crumbs from the table 24From there, he arose and went away to the borders of Tyre and Sidon.
 He entered a house and did not want anyone to know it, yet he could not escape notice.
 25Having heard about Jesus,e a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit came and fell down at his feet.
 26Now, this woman was a Greek, of Syro-Phoenician descent.
 She begged him to cast the demon out of her daughter.
 27But Jesus said to her, “Let the children be filled first, for it is not right to take the children’s bread and to throw it to the little dogs!” 28But she answered, “Yes, Lord.
 Yet even the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs!” 29Jesus said to her, “For saying this, you may go your way! The demon has gone out of your daughter.
” 30She went away to her house and found the child having been laid on the bed, with the demon gone out.
 The healing of a deaf man 31Again, Jesusf departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and came to the sea of Galilee, passing through the region of the Decapolis.
 32People brought him a person who was deaf and had an impediment in his speech, and they begged Jesus to lay his hand on him.
 33He took the man aside from the crowd, in private, put his fingers into his ears, then spat and touched his tongue.
 34Looking up to heaven, Jesusg sighed and said to him, “Ephphatha!” that is, “Be opened!” 35Immediately, the man’s ears were opened; the impediment of his tongue was released, and he spoke clearly.
 36Jesus told the people to tell no one, but the more he ordered them, the more widely they proclaimed it.
 37They were amazed beyond words, saying, “Everything he has done is good! He even makes the deaf hear, and the mute speak!” a Also “covetousness” or in some cases “forcing someone to do something / obtaining by force” Greek ovfqalmo.
j ponhro,j, conveys the idea of looking with jealousy and evil intent c Or “slander” d Or even “folly” e Greek “him” f Greek “he” g Greek “he” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 124 8 The feeding of the four thousand In those days, a very great crowd was [assembled] there and the people had nothing to eat.
 Jesus called his disciples to himself and told them, 2“I have compassion on the people because they have stayed with me for three days now, and they have nothing to eat.
 3If I send them away hungry to their homes, they will faint on the way, for some of them came from far away.
” 4His disciples replied, “From where could we satisfy these people with bread, here, in a deserted place?” 5Jesusa asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” They replied, “Seven.
” 6Jesus directed the crowd to sit down on the ground, and he took the seven loaves.
 After giving thanks, he broke them and gave them to his disciples to serve, and they served the people.
 7They also had a few small fish.
 After blessing them, Jesus also told them to serve the fish.
 8The people ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up seven baskets of broken pieces that were left over.
 9Those who had eaten were about four thousand.
 After this, Jesus sent the people away.
 The Pharisees ask for a sign – The yeast of the Pharisees 10Right after this, he got into the boat with his disciples and arrived into the region of Dalmanutha.
 11The Pharisees came out and began to question him, seeking from him a sign from heaven, and putting him to the test.
 12Jesus sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, “Why is this generation seeking a sign? Amen, I tell you: no sign will be given to this generation!” 13He left them, and again entered into the boat and departed to the other side.
 14But the disciplesb forgot to take bread and had only one loaf in the boat with them.
 15Jesus warned them in these words, “Be watchful, beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Herod.
” 16They bread!” reasoned among themselves, saying, “It is because we have no 17Jesus, perceiving this, said to them, “Why do you reason that it is because you have no bread [that I have said this]? Do you not yet perceive or understand? Is your heart still hardened? 18Having eyes, do you not see? Having ears, do you not hear? Do you not remember? 19When I broke the a b Greek “he” Greek “they” ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you gather up?” They told him, “Twelve!” 20“And after the seven loaves had fed four thousand people, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you gather up?” They replied, “Seven!” 21Jesus asked them, “Do you still not understand?” The healing of a blind man 22When he arrived at Bethsaida, people brought a blind man and begged Jesus to touch him.
 23Jesus took hold of the blind man by the hand and brought him out of the village.
 He spit on his eyes, laid his hands on the man, and asked him if he saw anything.
 24The man looked up and said, “I see people! I see them like trees walking!” 25Again, Jesus laid his hands on the man’s eyes who then looked [around] intently.
 His sight was then restored and he saw everyone clearly.
 26Jesus sent him away to his home, saying, “Do not enter into the village and do not tell anyone in the village.
” Peter’s confession about Jesus – First announcement of the passion 27Jesus went out with his disciples into the villages of Caesarea Philippi.
 On the way, he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?” 28They told him, “John the Baptizer, and others say Elias (Elijah), but others yet [say that you are] one of the prophets.
” 29Jesus said to them, “But you, who do you say that I am?” Peter answered, “You are the Christ!”a 30Jesus commanded them not to tell anyone who he was.
b 31He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the presbyters, the chief priests and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.
 32He spoke to them openly.
 Peter took him [aside] and began to rebuke him.
 33But Jesus, turning around and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter and said, “Get behind me, Satan! For you have in mind not the things of God, but the things of men.
” a b Or “Messiah (Anointed One)” Or “about him” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 126 Requirements for discipleship 34Jesus called the multitude to himself with his disciples and said to them, “Whoever wants to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
 35Indeed, whoever wants to save his life will lose it; and whoever will lose his life for my sake and for the sake of the Good News will save it.
 36What does it profit if someone, to gain the whole world, losesa his life? 37For what will someone give in exchange for his life? 38Whoever will be ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.
” 9 The Lord’s transfiguration Jesusb said to them, “Amen, I tell you that there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the Kingdom of Godc come with power.
” 2After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and brought them up to a high mountain in private, by themselves.
 [There], he was transfiguredd in front of them.
 3His clothing became radiant, extremely white like snow, such as no launderer on earth could whiten them.
 4Elias (Elijah) and Moses appeared to them, and they were talking with Jesus.
 5Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here! Let us make three tents:e one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elias (Elijah).
” 6He did not know what to say, for they were very afraid.
 7A cloud came which overshadowed them and a voice came out of the cloud, “This is my beloved Son! Listen to him.
” 8Suddenly, looking around, they saw no one with them any more, except Jesus only.
 a Or “forfeits, gives up” Greek “he” c This may be a reference to the Transfiguration (verse 2-8) or to a coming judgment on unbelievers: “In conventional readings of Mark 9:1, the meaning of the "kingdom of God coming with power" determines the identity of the bystanders who will supposedly experience ("see") it.
 Since the prediction of the kingdom is usually regarded as a blessing, it is assumed that the bystanders are protagonists.
 In contrast to this conventional approach, the reading proposed in this essay begins with the group(s) which will experience ("see") "the kingdom of God coming with power", first in 9:1 and then in 13:26 and 14:62.
 When prior attention is given to these groups in the context of the narrative, Jesus’ prediction in Mark 9:1 emerges not as a blessing promised to the protagonists, but as a threat of judgment aimed at antagonists.
” (Thomas Hatina in Biblica 86 (2005) 20-34) d Greek metemorfw,qh (metamorphosis, “changed into another form”) e Or “three tabernacles, booths, shelters,” perhaps a reference to the Jewish feast of the tabernacles.
 b ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ Question about Elijah’s coming 9As they were coming down from the mountain, he told them not to tell anyone what they had seen, until after the Son of Man would have risen from the dead.
 10They kept this saying to themselves, wondering what “rising from the dead” meant.
 11They asked him, “Why do the scribes say that Elias (Elijah) must come first?” 12Jesus answered, “Indeed, Elias (Elijah) comes first and restores all things.
 Why then is it written about the Son of Man that he must suffer many things and be despised? 13But I tell you that Elias (Elijah) has [already] come, and they have also done to him whatever they wanted to, even as it is written about him.
” The healing of a possessed boy 14Returning to the [other] disciples, Jesusa saw a great crowd around them, and scribes were questioning them.
 15At once, when all the people saw him, they were greatly amazed and rushed to greet him.
 16Jesus asked the scribes, “What are you asking them about?” 17In the crowd, someone said, “Teacher, I brought you my son who has a mute spirit.
 18Wherever the spirit seizes him, it throws him to the ground and my son foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes rigid.
 I asked your disciples to cast it out, but they were not able.
” 19Jesus answered him, “Unbelieving generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring him to me.
” 20They brought the son to him, and when he saw Jesus, the spirit immediately convulsed the boy who fell to the ground and rolled around, foaming at the mouth.
 21Jesus asked the boy’s father, “How long has he been like this?” “From childhood,” he answered.
 22“Often, it has thrown him both into the fire and into water, in order to destroy him.
 But if you are able to do anything, have compassion on us and help us!” 23Jesus said to the man, “If you are able! All things are possible to the one who believes!” 24Immediately my unbelief!” a Greek “he” the father of the child cried out with tears, “I believe! Help THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 128 25When Jesus saw that a crowd was running to the scene, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to him, “You mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and never enter him again!” 26The spirit cried out, convulsed greatly, and came out of the boy.
 He became as dead, so much that most of the people said, “He is dead!” 27But Jesus took him by the hand, raised him up; and the boy stood up.
 28When Jesus entered into the house, his disciples asked him privately, “Why could we not cast it out?” 29He answered, “This kind can come out by nothing, except by prayer and fasting.
”a The Lord’s passion announced again – The greatest in the Kingdom 30They left that place and passed through Galilee, [and] Jesus did not want anyone to know it.
 31He was teaching his disciples and told them, “The Son of Man is to be delivered into the hands of men.
 They will kill him, and when he is killed, he will rise again on the third day.
” 32But they did not understand the saying and were afraid to ask him.
 33Jesus arrived in Capernaum, and when he was in the house, he asked his disciples, “What were you arguing among yourselves on the way?” 34However, they remained silent because on the way, they had argued with one another about who was the greatest.
 35He sat down, called the Twelve and told them, “If anyone wants to be first, he shall be last of all, and the servant of all.
” 36He took a little child and set him in their midst.
 Taking the child in his arms, he said to them, 37“Whoever receives such a little child in my Name, receives me; and whoever receives me, does not receive me, but the one who sent me.
” The exorcist who uses Jesus’ Name 38John said to him, “Teacher, we have seen someone who does not follow usb casting out demons in your Name; and we forbade him, because he does not follow us!” 39But Jesus said, “Do not forbid him, for no one who does a mighty work in my Name will be able to quickly speak evil of me.
 40Whoever is not against us is on our side! 41Amen, I tell you that whoever will give you a cup of water to drink in my Name, because you belong to Christ, will not lose his reward.
 42But if someone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for such a person to be thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around the neck.
” a b CT omits “and fasting” which is found in Byzantine manuscripts including PT CT omits “who does not follow us” ACCORDING TO MARK - ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ Radical measures against causes of sin 43“If your hand causes you to stumble, cut it off! It is better for you to enter into life maimed, rather than have your two hands and go into Gehenna,a the unquenchable fire 44‘where their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.
’b 45If your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off! It is better for you to enter into life lame, rather than having your two feet to be cast into Gehenna,c the fire that will never be quenched, 46‘where their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.
’d 47If your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out! It is better for you to enter into the Kingdom of God with one eye, rather than with two eyes be cast into the Gehennae of fire, 48‘where their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.
’f About salt 49Indeed, everyone will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt.
g 50Salt is good, but if the salt has lost its saltiness, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another.
” ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ Archangel Gabriel By the hand of Julia Hayes THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT The presentation at the Temple Russian, 15th century, Novgorod Museum, Russia 150 ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ (ACCORDING TO) LUKE (ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ) 1 Luke’s motivations and methods Manya have undertaken to set in order a narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled among us, 2even as those who were eyewitnesses and servants of the word since the beginning have delivered them to us.
 3For this reason, it has seemed good to me also, after reviewing the course of all things accurately from the beginning, to write an ordered account to you, most excellent Theophilus, 4so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught.
 The birth of John (the Baptist) is announced 5In the days of Herod king of Judea, there lived a priest named Zacharias who belonged to the priestly division of Abijah.
 He had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
 6Both of them were righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord.
 7Yet, they had no child because Elizabeth was barren, and both were well advanced in years.
 8Now, it came to pass that while Zacharias was performing his priestly office before God in the order of his division, 9according to the custom of the priest’s office, that his lot was [drawn] to enter into the sanctuaryb of the Lord and burn incense.
 10Now, at the time of the incense offering, the whole multitude of the people was praying outside.
 11Then, an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
 12Zacharias was startled when he saw the angel and was gripped with fear.
 13But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zacharias, because your petition has been heard.
 Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John.
 14You will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth.
 15Indeed, he will be great in the sight of the Lord! He will drink no wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother’s womb.
 16He will bring back many of the children of Israel to the Lord, their God.
 17He will go before the Lordc in the spirit and power of Elias (Elijah), ‘to turn the hearts a Perhaps a reference to Matthew (or Proto-Matthew) and Mark In this case the ‘holy place’ (not the ‘holy of holies’) c Greek “him” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 152 of the fathers to the children,’ and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.
” 18Zacharias said to the angel, “How can I be sure of this? For I am an old man, and my wife is well advanced in years!” 19The angel answered him, “I am Gabriel who stands near before God.
a I was sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news.
b 20Behold, you will be silent and unable to speak until the day that these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their proper time.
” 21The people were waiting for Zacharias and wondering as he delayed in the sanctuary.
 22When he came out, he could not speak to them and they understood that he had seen a vision in the sanctuary.
 He continued to make signs to them and remained mute.
 23When the days of his service were fulfilled, Zacharias returned to his house.
 24After these days, his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she hid herself five months, saying: 25“The Lord has done this to me in the days when he looked at me, in order to take away my disgrace among men.
” The Annunciation of the birth of Jesus 26Now, in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth, 27to a virgin pledged to be married to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David.
 The virgin’s name was Mary.
 28Having come in, the angel said to her, “Rejoice,c full of grace!d The Lord is with you! Blessed are you among women!”e 29But when she saw him, she was greatly troubled at the saying and considered what kind of greeting this might be.
 30The angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
 31Behold, you will conceive in your womb and bring forth a son, and you will call his name ‘Jesus.
’ 32He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High.
 The Lord God will give him the throne of his father, David, 33and he a Greek aresthkw.
j evnw,pion tou/ qeou/ Or indeed “Good News” c Or “Hail!” / “Greetings” – One of the most common Hebrew greetings is ~Alv', “peace,” reflected in eivrh,nh in Lk 10:5; 24:36, but the LXX never translates ~Alv', “peace,” by the imperative Cai/re.
 J.
 McHugh, in The Mother of Jesus, 38-39, notes, "The imperative form Cai/re, far from being a conventional greeting, always refers to the joy attendant on the deliverance of Israel; wherever it occurs, it is a translation of a Hebrew verb meaning 'Rejoice greatly!'" (or “shout” for joy).
 d This is the traditional expression.
 “The perfect participle kecaritwme,nh has the strongest connotation of the present: ‘having been favored and as a result still being in this blessed condition.
’ The root in the verb is ca,rij, grace, the unmerited favor bestowed by God.
 The passive voice makes God the agent.
” (R.
C.
H.
 Lenski, The Interpretation of St.
 Luke's Gospel (Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing House, 1946) p.
 62).
 Many translations have “Greetings, favored one!” or something similar.
 e CT omits “Blessed are you among women” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ will reign over the house of Jacob forever.
 And to his Kingdom there shall be no end.
”a 34Mary said to the angel, “How can this be, since I do not know a man?”b 35The angel answered her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadowc you.
 Therefore, the holy one who is born from you will be called the Son of God.
 36Behold, your relative Elizabeth has also conceived a son in her old age and this is the sixth month [of her pregnancy] for her who was called barren.
 37For everything spoken by God is possible.
” 38Mary said, “Behold, the handmaid of the Lord! Be it to me according to your word.
” And the angel departed from her.
 Mary, the Theotokos and new Ark, visits Elizabeth 39In those days, Mary arose and went into the hill country with haste to a city of Judah.
 40She entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth.
 41And it happened that when Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
 42In a loud voice, she exclaimed, “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb! 43Why am I so favored, that the mother of my Lordd should come to me? 44For behold, when the voice of your greeting came to my ears, the baby leapede in my womb out of joy! 45Blessed is she who believed, for the things which have been spoken to her from the Lord will be fulfilled!” The Magnificat 46Mary said, My soul magnifies the Lord 47 And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, 48 for he has looked at the humble state of his handmaid.
 For behold, from now on, all generations shall call me blessed! a Used in the Creed of Nicea-Constantinople Or “since I am a virgin?” c Greek evpiskia,sei - Compare Exodus 40:33-35 LXX which is the only other instance where this verb is used: “And Moses was not able to enter into the tabernacle of testimony, because the cloud overshadowed (evpeski,azen) it, and the tabernacle was filled with the glory of the Lord” d Compare 2 Samuel 6:9.
 This verse, coupled with John 1:1,14; 20:28 is the basis for the expression theotokos applied to the Virgin Mary at the Council of Ephesus in 431.
 This is a Christological title used to safeguard the unity of the divine hypostatis of the incarnate Word from the point of conception onward.
 Luke 1:39-50 parallels 2 Samuel 6 (see Introductory Section – Typologies), indicating that Mary is the fulfilment of the Ark of the Covenant.
 e Also spelled “leapt” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 154 Indeed, he who is mighty has done great things for me, and Holy is his Name! 50 His mercy is for generations of generations on those who fear him.
 51 He has shown strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts,a 52 He has put down princes from their thrones, and has exalted the lowly.
b 53 He has filled the hungry with good things, he has sent the rich away empty.
 54 He has given help to Israel, his servant, so that he might remember mercy, 55 As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and his posterityc forever.
 49 56Mary stayed with Elizabeth for about three months, and then returned to her house.
 The birth of John the Baptist 57Now, the time when Elizabeth should give birth was fulfilled, and she gave birth to a son.
 58Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown his great mercy towards her, and they rejoiced with her.
 59On the eighth day, they came to circumcise the child and they wanted to name him Zacharias after his father.
 60But his mother answered, “It shall not be! Instead, he will be called John!” 61They said to her, “But there is no one among your relatives who is called by this name!” 62They made signs to his father to see what he wanted to have his son called.
 63Zacharias asked for a writing tablet and wrote, “His name is John.
” They were all very surprised.
 64Suddenly, his mouth was opened and his tongue was freed.
 He began to speak, blessing God.
 65Awe came upon all who lived around them, and people talked about these sayings throughout the entire hill country of Judea.
 66All those who heard these things took them to heart and exclaimed, “What then will this child be?” And indeed, the hand of the Lord was with the child.
d a Or “those who are proud in their inmost thoughts” (NIV) Compare Sirach 10:14 c Or “seed / descendants” d Greek “him” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ The canticle of Zacharias (Zachariah) 67His father, Zacharias, was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying: Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has visited and worked redemption for his people; 69 and has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David 70 (as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets who have been from of old), salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us; 72 to show mercy towards our fathers, to remember his holy covenant, 73 the oath which he spoke to Abraham, our father, to grant us 74that being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, we should offer him divine servicea without fear, 75 in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.
 76 And you, child, [you] will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways, to give knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission of their sins, 78 because of the tender mercy of our God, by which the dawn from on high will visit us, 79 to shine on those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death; to guide our feet into the way of peace.
 68 80The child was growing up and became strong in spirit, and he was in the desert until the day of his public appearance to Israel.
 2 The Nativity of our Lord In those days, Caesar Augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken of the entire [Roman] world.
 2This was the first census made when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
 3All went to enroll themselves, everyone to his own city.
 4Because he was of the house and family of David, Joseph left the city of Nazareth in Galilee and went up to Judea, to the city of David which is called Bethlehem.
 5He did so to enroll himself with Mary who was pledged to be married to him as wife and who was pregnant.
 6While they were there, the time came for her to deliver her child.
 7She gave birth to her firstbornb son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes.
 She a b Greek latreu,ein See Appendix E THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 156 laid him in a manger because there was no room for them in the inn.
a 8There were shepherds in the same countryside, staying in the field and keeping watch by night over their flock.
 9And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by them and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.
 10The angel said to them, “Do not be afraid, for behold, I bring you Good News of great joy which will be for all the people.
 11For there is born to you, this day, in the city of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord! 12This is the signb to you: you will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth,c lying in a manger.
” 13Suddenly, there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying: Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, [and] good will among mankind.
d 14 The shepherds’ visit 15When the angels went away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, “Let us go to Bethlehem now and see what has taken place, which the Lord has made known to us.
” 16They came with haste and found both Mary and Joseph, and the baby was lying in the manger.
 17After seeing it, they revealed the news which had been spoken to them about this child.
 18All those who heard what the shepherds were saying were amazed, 19but Mary kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart.
 20The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things which they had heard and seen, just as it was told them.
 The Circumcision of our Lord – The Presentation in the Temple 21When the eight days were fulfilled and the time came for the circumcision of the child, he was named Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
 22And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, Joseph and Mary brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord.
 23(For it is written in the law of the Lord, “Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord”).
e 24[They also brought him] to offer a sacrifice according to what is said in the law of the Lord, “A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.
”f a Or perhaps “guest room” Compare Isaias (Isaiah) 7:14 LXX which also used the Greek word shmei/on c Or “swaddling clothes” d Or “peace for those whom he favors / peace to those on whom his favor rest” (NJB/NAB) e Exodus 13:2,12 f Leviticus 12:8 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 25Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon.
 This man was righteous and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and [the]a Holy Spirit was upon him.
 26It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not see death before he had seen the Lord’s anointed.
b 27He came in the Spirit into the temple.
 The parents brought in the child Jesus in order to do according to the custom of the law concerning him.
 28Then Simeon took Jesus in his arms and blessed God, saying, Now you let your servant depart in peace, Master, according to your word, 30 for my eyes have seen your salvation,c 31 which you have prepared before the face of all peoples; 32 a light to enlighten the gentiles,d and the glory of your people Israel.
 29 33Josephe and his mother were wondering at the things which were spoken concerning him.
 34Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, his mother, Behold, this child is set for the falling and the rising of many in Israel, and as a sign which is spoken against.
 35 Yes, a sword will pierce through your own soul, so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.
 36There was a certain Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (she was of a great age, having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity,f 37and she had been a widow for about eighty-four years), who did not depart from the temple, offering divine serviceg with fastings and petitions night and day.
 38Coming up at that very hour, she gave thanks to the Lord and spoke of Jesush to all those who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem.
 Return to Nazareth of Galilee 39When Joseph and Maryi had accomplished all things that were according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city, Nazareth.
 40The child was growing, and was becoming strong in spirit, a The Greek actually uses the indefinite Or “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew) both mean “Anointed One” c Compare Tobit 11:9,14 d Or “a light of revelation to the nations” e CT reads “his father” instead of “Joseph” f This is the literal translation – it seems that Anna was married for seven years.
 NJB reads “Her days of girlhood over, she had been married for seven years” g Greek latreu,ousa h Greek “him” i Greek “they” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 158 being filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.
 41His parents went every year to Jerusalem for the feast of the Passover.
 Jesus as a twelve-year old in the temple 42When Jesusa was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast.
 43When they had fulfilled the days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem.
 Joseph and his mother did not noticeb it.
 44Supposing him to be in the company, they went a day’s journey and began to look for him among their relatives and acquaintances.
 45When they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem, looking for him.
 46After three days, they found him in the temple, sitting among the teachers, both listening to them and asking them questions.
 47All who heard him were amazed by his understanding and answers.
 48When his parentsc saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said to him, “Son, why have you treated us this way? Behold, your father and I were anxiously looking for you.
” 49He said to them, “Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in my Father’s house?” 50But they did not understand what he said to them.
 51After this, he went down with them, and came to Nazareth.
 He was obedientd to them, and his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
 52And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, as well as in favor with God and men.
 3 The ministry of John the Baptist Now, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene, 2during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness.
 3He came into the entire region around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins.
 4As it is written in the book of the words of Isaias (Isaiah) the prophet: The voice of one crying in the wilderness,e “Make ready the way of the Lord.
 Make his paths straight.
 a Greek “he” Or “know” c Greek “they” d Or “subject” e NT agrees with LXX against MT b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ Every valley will be filled.
 Every mountain and hill will be brought low.
 The crooked will become straight, and the rough ways smooth.
 6 All flesh will see God’s salvation.
”a 5 7To the multitudes who went out to be baptized by him, John said, “You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 8Therefore, bring forth fruits worthy of repentance.
 Do not begin to say among yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father;’ for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones! 9Even now, the axe also lies at the root of the tree, and so every tree that does not bring forth good fruit is [to be] cut down and thrown into the fire.
” 10The multitudes asked him, “What then must we do?” 11Johnb answered them, “Whoever has two coats should give to the one who has none.
 He who has food should do likewise.
” 12Tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they asked him, “Teacher, what must we do?” 13He replied, “Do not collect more than what is appointed to you.
” 14Soldiers also asked him, “What about us? What must we do?” He said to them, “Extort from no one by violence and do not accuse anyone wrongfully.
 Be satisfied with your wages.
” 15As the people were in expectation, and everyone reasoned in their hearts concerning John, whether perhaps he was the Christ, 16John answered them all, “I indeed baptize you with water, but the one who is coming is more powerful than I! I am not worthy to untie the strap of his sandals! He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire! 17His winnowing fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor.
 He will gather the wheat into his barn; but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.
” 18With many other exhortations, he preached Good News to the people.
 Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias, his brother’sc wife, and for all the evil things which he had done, 20added this also to them all, that he shut up John in prison.
 19But a Isaias (Isaiah) 40:3-5.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT Greek “he” c TR reads “brother Philip’s” instead of “brother’s” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 160 Theophany: The Lord’s Baptism 21Now it happened, after all the people were baptized, that Jesus was also baptized.
 As he was praying, heavena was opened, 22and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove on him.
 A voice came out of heaven,b saying “You are my beloved Son! In you I am well pleased.
”c 23Jesus himself, when he began to teach, was about thirty years old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli, 24the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph, 25the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai, 26the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah, 27the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri, 28the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er, 29the son of Jose, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, 30the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son of Eliakim, 31the son of Melea, the son of Menan, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David, 32the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon, 33the son of Amminadab, the son of Aram,d the son of Joram,e the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah, 34the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, 35the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah, 36/the son of Cainan/,f the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, 37the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, 38the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
 4 The temptation in the desert Full of the Holy Spirit, Jesus returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness.
 2For forty days, he was tempted by the devil.
 He ate nothing in those days and afterward, when they were completed, he was hungry.
 3The devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread!” a Or “the sky” Or “the sky” c Codex Bezae (D) reads “You are my son, I today have begotten you” (Psalms 2:7) which is mentionned by Justin Martyr and Clement of Alexandria.
 d CT reads “Admin, the son of Arni” instead of “Aram” e CT omits “the son of Joram” f This extra ‘Cainan’ entry may be a transcription error made by an early copyist.
 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 4Jesus answered him, saying, “It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.
’”a 5Leading him up on a high place, the devil showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
 6The devil said to him, “I will give you all this authority and their glory, for it has been delivered to me and I give it to whomever I want.
b 7If you therefore will express adoration toc me,d it will all be yours.
” 8Jesus answered him, “Get behind me Satan!e For it is written, ‘You shall express adoration to the Lord your God, and to him only shall you offer divine service.
’”f 9The devilg led him to Jerusalem, set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, cast yourself down from here, 10for it is written, He will put his angels in charge of you, to guard you; 11and, They will carry you with their hands, for fear that you may dash your foot against a stone.
h 12In reply, Jesus said to him, “It has been said, ‘You shall not tempt the Lord your God.
’”i 13When the devil had completed every temptation, he departed from Jesusj until another time.
 The Lord’s ministry in Galilee and his rejection in Nazareth 14Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, and news about him spread through all the surrounding area.
 15He taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
 a Deuteronomy 8:3.
 CT omits “but by every word of God” - The PT is unique in this instance in that it not only contains “but by every word…of God” but also has the additional words (parallel Matthew 4:4): “but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God” b Revelation 13:12 c proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) d Revelation 13:4,12 e CT omits “Get behind Me, Satan!” f Deuteronomy 6:13.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT g Greek “he” h Psalms 91:11-12 / 90 LXX i Deuteronomy 6:16 j Greek “him” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 162 16He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up.
 As was his custom, he entered into the synagogue on the Sabbath day and stood up to read.
 17The scroll of the prophet Isaias (Isaiah) was handed to him.
 He opened the book, and found the place where it was written: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,a because he has anointed me to preach Good News to the poor.
 He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted,b to proclaim release to the captives, recovery of sight to the blind, to deliver those who are crushed,c 19 and to proclaim the favorabled year of the Lord.
e 18 20He closed the scroll, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down.
 The eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him.
 21He began to tell them, “Today, this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.
” 22All testified about him and marveled at the gracious words which came out of his mouth; and they said, “Is this not Joseph’s son?” 23He said to them, “Without doubt, you will quote me this proverb, ‘Physician, heal yourself! Do also [right] here in your hometown whatever we have heard that was done at Capernaum!’” 24Jesusf continued, “Amen, I tell you that no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.
 25But I tell you in truth, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elias (Elijah), when the sky was shut up for three years and six months, when a great famine came all over the land.
 26Elias (Elijah) was sent to none of them, except to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.
 27There were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them was cleansed, except Naaman, the Syrian.
” 28As they heard these things, all in the synagogue were filled with anger.
 rose up, threw Jesusg out of the city, and led him to the edge of the hill that their city was built on in order to push him off the cliff.
 30But passing through their midst, he went his way.
 29They a NT agrees with LXX against MT CT omits “to heal the brokenhearted” c Or “to set free those who are bruised.
” NT agrees with LXX against MT d Or “acceptable” e Isaias (Isaiah) 61:1-2 f Greek “he” g Greek “him” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ The healing of a demoniac in Capernaum 31Jesusa came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee.
 He was teaching the peopleb on the Sabbath day, 32and they were astonished at his teaching because his word was with authority.
 33In the synagogue, there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice, 34“Ah! what have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!” 35Jesusc rebuked him, saying, “Be silent, and come out of him!” When the demon had thrown the man among them, he came out of him, having done him no harm.
 36Amazement came on all, and they spoke together, one with another, saying, “What is this word? For he commands the unclean spirits with authority and power, and they come out!” 37News about him went out into every place of the surrounding region.
 The healing of Peter’s (Simon’s) mother in law – Other healings 38Jesus left the synagogue and entered into Simon’s house.
 Simon’s motherin-law was afflicted with a great fever, and they asked him [to do something] for her.
 39He stood over her, rebuked the fever, and it left her.
 Immediately, she rose up and served them.
 40When the sun was setting, all those who had anyone sick with various diseases brought them to Jesus;d and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.
 41Demons also came out from many, crying out, “You are the Christ, the Son of God!” Rebuking them, Jesuse did not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
 42When it was day, he departed and went into an uninhabited place.
 The people were looking for him and came to him.
 They held on to Jesusf in order to prevent himg from leaving them.
 43But he said to them, “I must preach the Good News of the Kingdom of God to the other cities as well.
 I have been sent for this reason!” 44And he continued preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
 a Greek “he” Greek “them” c Greek “he” d Greek “him” e Greek “he” f Greek “him” g Greek “Jesus” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 164 5 The calling of Simon (Peter), James and John Now it happened, while the multitude pressed on him and heard the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret.
 2He saw two boats standing by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them and they were washing their nets.
 3Jesusa entered into one of the boats, which was Simon’s, and asked him to put out a little from the land.
 He sat down and taught the multitudes from the boat.
 4When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for a catch.
” 5Simon answered him, “Master, we worked all night and took nothing! But at your word, I will let down the net.
” 6When they had done this, they caught a great multitude of fish, and their net was breaking.
 7They beckoned to their partners in the other boat to come and help them.
 They came and filled both boats, so [much] that they began to sink.
 8But when Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, “Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord!” 9He and all who were with him were amazed at their catch of fish; 10and so also were James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon.
 Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid! From now on, you will be catching people alive.
” 11When they had brought their boats to shore, they left everything and followed him.
 The healing of a leper 12It happened, while Jesusb was in one of the cities, that there was a man full of leprosy.
 When he saw Jesus, he fell on his face, and begged him, saying, “Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean.
” 13Jesus stretched out his hand, touched him, and said, “I want to! Be made clean.
” Immediately the leprosy left him.
 14Jesus commanded him to tell no one: “But go your way, show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing according to what Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.
” 15Still, the report concerning him spread much more, and great multitudes came together to hear and to be healed by him of their infirmities.
 16However, Jesusc withdrew into the desert and prayed.
 a Greek “he” (also in verse 13, 15, 17 and 27) Greek “he” c Greek “he” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ The healing of a paralytic 17It happened, on one of those days, that Jesus was teaching; and there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by, who had come out of every village of Galilee, Judea, and Jerusalem.
 The power of the Lord was with him to heal the people.
 18Behold, men brought a paralyzed man on a cot, and they sought to bring him in to lay before Jesus.
 19Not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up to the housetop and let him down through the tiles with his cot, right in the center, in front of Jesus.
 20Seeing their faith, Jesusa said to him, “Man, your sins are forgiven you.
” 21The scribes and the Pharisees began to think about this, saying, “Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?” 22But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered them, “Why are you reasoning in your hearts in such a way? 23Which is easier to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven you;’ or to say, ‘Arise and walk?’ 24However, so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins” (he said to the paralyzed man), “I tell you, arise, take up your cot, and go to your house.
” 25Immediately, the man rose up before them and took up what he was laying on, and departed to his house, glorifying God.
 26Amazement took hold of all, and they glorified God.
 They were filled with fear,b saying, “We have seen strange things today!” The calling of Levi (Matthew) 27After these things, Jesusc went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax office.
 He said to him, “Follow me!” 28Levi left everything, got up and began to follow Jesus.
 29He made a great feast for Jesusd in his house.
 A great crowd of tax collectors was [assembled] there, and other people were also at tablee with them.
 30The scribes and the Pharisees murmured against Jesus’ disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?” 31Jesus answered them, “Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do! 32I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
” a Greek “he” Or “awe” c Greek “he” d Greek “him” e Or “reclining” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 166 About fasting 33They asked him, “Why do John’s disciples often fast and pray, as also the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink?” 34Jesusa said to them, “Can you make the friends of the bridegroom fast, while the bridegroom is with them? 35But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them.
 Then, they will fast in those days.
” 36He also told them a parable: “No one puts a piece from a new garment on an old garment, or else he will tear the new, and also the piece from the new will not match the old.
 37No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, and it will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed.
 38Instead, new wine must be put into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.
 39No one who has drunk old wine immediately desires new, for he says, ‘The old is better!’” 6 About the Sabbath On a certain Sabbath day, Jesus was walking through the grain fields.
 His disciples plucked heads of grain and ate them, rubbing the heads in their hands.
 2But some among the Pharisees asked them, “Why do you do what is not lawful on the Sabbath day?” 3Jesus answered them with these words, “Have not you read what David did when he was hungry, along with those who were with him? 4How he entered into the house of God, took and ate the show breadb and also gave it to those who were with him, even though it is not lawful to eat [from it] except for the priests alone?” 5He said to them, “The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.
” 6On another Sabbath, Jesus entered into the synagogue and began to teach.
 A man was there whose right hand was withered.
 7The scribes and the Pharisees were watching Jesus,c to see if he would heal on the Sabbath, so that they might find an accusation against him.
 8But Jesus perceivedd their thoughts.
 He said to the man who had the withered hand, “Rise up, and stand in the midst [of all];” and the man arose and stood up.
 9Then Jesus said to them, “I will ask you something: Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath, or to do harm? To save a life, or to kill?” 10He looked around at all of them and said to the man, “Stretch out your hand!” The man did so, and a Greek “he” Or “bread of the presence” c Greek “him” d Or “knew” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ his hand was restored as healthy as the other.
 11However, the scribes and the Phariseesa were filled with rage and talked with one another about what they might do to Jesus.
 The Twelve 12It happened in these days, that Jesusb went out into the mountain to pray; and he continued all night, in prayer to God.
 13When day came, he called his disciples and chose twelve from among them, which he also named ‘apostles’:c 14Simon, whom he also named Peter; Andrew, his brother; James;d John; Philip; Bartholomew; 15Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Simon, who was called the Zealot; 16Judas [the son] of James; and Judas Iscariot, who also became a traitor.
 17He came down with them and stood on a level place.
 A large number of his disciples and of people from all Judea, Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases.
 18Those who were troubled by unclean spirits also came, and they were healed.
 19The whole multitude desired to touch him because power came out from him and healed them all.
 The Lord’s sermon 20Jesus looked up to his disciples, and said: Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God.
 21 Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be filled.
 Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
 22 Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall exclude and mock you, and throw out your name as evil for the sake of the Son of Man.
 23 Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did the same thing to the prophets.
 But woe to you who are rich! For you have received your consolation.
 25 Woe to you, you who are full now, for you will be hungry.
 24 a Greek “they” Greek “he” c Which means “sent” d Greek VIa,kwbon b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 168 Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
 26 Woe [to you,]a when allb men speak well of you, for their fathers did the same thing to the false prophets.
 Love for one’s enemies 27But I tell you who hear: love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, 28bless those who curse you, and pray for those who mistreat you.
 29To the one who strikes you on the cheek, offer also the other [cheek].
 If someone takes away your cloak, do not refuse your coat as well.
 30Give to anyone who asks you, and if anyone takes what belongs to you, do not demand it back.
 31As you would like others to do to you, do the same to them.
 32If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners love those who love them! 33If you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners do the same! 34If you lend to those from whom you hope to receive [back], what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to receive back as much.
 35But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing back.
 Then your reward will be great and you will be children of the Most High, for he is kind [even] to the ungrateful and evil.
 Therefore, be merciful, even as your Father is also merciful.
 37 Do not judge, and you will not be judged.
 Do not condemn, and you will not be condemned.
 Set free, and you will be set free.
 36 38Give, and it will be given to you: a good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and overflowing will be given to you.
c For with the same measure [that] you measure, it will be measured back to you.
” The beam and the speck – Judging others – The tree and its fruits 39He spoke a parable to them.
 “Can the blind guide the blind? Will they not both fall into a pit? 40A disciple is not above his teacher, but after being fully trained, everyone will be like their teacher.
 41Why do you see the speck of chaff that is in your brother’s eye but do not consider the beam a TR adds “to you” Other manuscripts omit “all” c Literally “into your bosom” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ that is in your own eye? 42Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me remove the speck of chaff that is in your eye,’ when you do not see the beam that is in your own eye? You hypocrites! First, remove the beam from your own eye, and then you will be able to see clearly in order to remove the speck of chaff that is in your brother’s eye.
 43For there is no good tree that brings forth rotten fruit, or any rotten tree that produces good fruit.
 44Indeed, each tree is recognizeda by its own fruit!b People do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they pick up grapes from a bramble bush.
 45Out of the good treasure of his heart, a good person brings out what is good, but out of the evil treasure of his heart, one who is evil brings out what is evil.
 For out of the overflowing of the heart, thec mouth speaks.
 Those who say ‘Lord, Lord’ – Building on rock or sand 46Why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ and do not do what I say? 47I will show you what the person is like who comes to me, hears my words and does them.
 48He is like a man building a house who dug and went deep, and laid a foundation on the rock.
 When a flood arose, the waterd rushed against that house but could not shake it, because it was founded on the rock.
e 49But the one who hears and does not practice is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation.
 The stream rushed against it, and at once it fell down; and the ruin of that house was great.
” 7 The healing of the Centurion’s servant When Jesus had finished speaking all that he wanted the people to hear, he entered into Capernaum.
 2There was the servant of a certain centurion, a man highly valued by his master, who was sick and at the point of death.
 3When the centurion heard about Jesus, he sent to him presbyters of the Jews to ask him to come and save his servant.
 4When they came to Jesus, they pleaded earnestly with him, saying, “This man deserves to have you do this 5because he loves our nation and [even] built our synagogue for us.
” 6Jesus went along with them, but as he was approaching the house, the centurion sent word to him (by some friends to say to him), “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy for you to come under my roof.
 7Therefore, I did not even think myself worthy to come to you.
 But [only] say the word and my servant will be healed.
 8For I am also a man placed a Or “known” James 2:18 c Greek “his” d Greek “stream” e Compare Matthew 16:18 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 170 under authority, and I have soldiers under my command.
a I tell this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.
” 9When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him.
 Turning around, he said to the multitude who followed him, “I tell you, I have not found such great faith even in Israel!” 10And the messengers, returning to the house, found that the servant who had been sick was [now] well.
 The raising of the son of the widow of Nain 11Soon afterwards, Jesus went to a city called Nain.
 Many of his disciples, along with a great multitude, went with him.
 12Now, when Jesus drew near to the gate of the city, behold, a dead person was being carried out, who was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.
 Many people of the city were with her.
 13When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said to her, “Do not cry.
” 14He came near and touched the coffin, and the bearers stood still.
 He then said, “Young man, I tell you, arise!” 15And the dead man sat up, and began to speak.
 Jesus then gave him to his mother.
 16They were all filled with awe and glorified God, saying, “A great prophet has arisen among us!” and, “God has visited his people!” 17This news concerning Jesus spread throughout Judea and in all the surrounding countryside.
 Messengers from John the Baptist – The Lord’s own witness about John 18John’s disciples told the Baptistb about all these things.
 19John called two of his disciples and sent them to Jesus to ask, “Are you the one who is coming, or should we look for another?” 20When the men reached Jesus, they said, “John the Baptizer has sent us to you, saying: ‘Are you the one who is coming or should we look for another?’” 21At that very time, Jesus had been healing many diseases, plagues and evil spirits; and had given sight to many who were blind.
 22Jesus answered them, “Go and tell John what you have seen and heard: the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have Good News preached to them.
 23Blessed is he who is not offended by me!” 24When John’s messengers had departed, Jesusc began to tell the multitudes about John, “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? 25What then did you go out to see? A man clothed in a Greek “myself” Greek “him” (“Baptist” substituted for clarification) c Greek “he” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ soft clothing? Behold, those who are gorgeously dressed and live delicately are in kings’ courts.
 26But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet! 27This is he of whom it is written: ‘Behold, I send my messenger before your face,a who will prepare your way before you.
’b 28For I tell you, among those who are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptizer; yet whoever is least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he.
” 29Hearing this, all the people and the tax collectors who had been baptized with John’s baptism confessed God to be vindicated.
 30However, the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected God’s purpose,c not being baptized by him themselves.
 31d“To what, then, can I compare the people of this generation? What are they like? 32They are like children who sit in the marketplace and who call one another, saying: ‘We played the pipes to you, and you did not dance! We mourned, and you did not cry!’ 33For John the Baptizer came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon!’ 34The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Behold, a glutton and a drunkard; a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ 35Yet Wisdom is justifiede by all her children.
”f A sinful woman is forgiven 36One of the Pharisees invited Jesus to eat with him.
 He entered into the Pharisee’s house, and sat at the table.
 37And behold, a woman who was a sinner in the city, when she learned that he was at table in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster jar of perfume.
 38Standing behind at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears, and she wiped them with the hair of her head.
 She also kissed his feet and anointed them with the perfumed oil.
 39Now, when the Pharisee who had invited Jesus saw this, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would have perceived who is touching him and what kind of woman this is, that she is a sinner.
” 40Jesus said to him, “Simon, I have something to tell you.
” He replied, “Speak, teacher.
” a NT agrees with MT against LXX Malachi 3:1 c Or possibly “rejected the counsel (purpose) of God for themselves” d TR adds “But the Lord said” e Or “vindicated” f See Wisdom of Sirach 4:11; Revelation 12:1-2,17 and notes b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 172 41“A certain lender had two debtors.
 One owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
 42When they could not pay, he forgave them both.
 Then, which of them will love him the most?” 43Simon answered, “The one to whom he forgave the most I suppose.
” Jesus said to him, “You have judged correctly.
” 44Turning to the woman, he said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? I entered into your house, and you gave me no water for my feet; but she has wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with the her hair.
 45You gave me no kiss, but since the time I came in, she has not ceased kissing my feet.
 46You did not anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with perfume.
 47Therefore, I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven because she has loved much.
 But the one to whom little is forgiven loves little.
” 48Jesusa said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.
” 49Those who sat at the table with him began to say to themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?” 50Then Jesus said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you.
 Go in peace.
” 8 The women disciples of the Lord Soon afterwards, Jesusb went through cities and villages, preaching and bringing the Good News of the Kingdom of God.
 With him were the Twelve, 2and certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out; 3Joanna, the wife of Chuzas, Herod’s steward; Susanna; and many others; who served himc from their possessions.
 The parable of the sower – About parables 4As a great crowd was coming together and as people from every city were coming to him, he spoke by a parable.
 5“A farmer went out to sow his seed.
 As he was sowing, some [seed] fell along the wayside; it was trampled under foot, and the birds of the sky devoured it.
 6Other seed fell on the rock, and as soon as it grew, it withered away because it had no moisture.
 7Other fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew with it, and choked it.
 8Other fell into the good ground, grew, and brought forth fruit a hundred times.
” As he said this, he exclaimed, “Let anyone with ears to hear listen!” a Greek “he” Greek “he” c Other manuscripts read “them” instead of “him” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 9Then his disciples asked him, “What does this parable mean?” 10Jesus replied, “To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to the rest, [it is given] in parables, so that ‘seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.
’a 11Now, this what the parable means: The seed is the word of God.
 12Those along the wayside are those who hear.
 Then, the devil comes and takes away the word from their heart, so that they may not believe and be saved.
 13Those on the rock are those who receive the word with joy when they hear.
 But they have no root; they believe for a while, then fall away in time of temptation.
 14What fell among the thorns is those who have heard, and as they go on their way, they are choked with worries, wealth, and the pleasures of life; and they bring no fruit to maturity.
 15As for the seed that fell in the rich soil, this is those who have heard the word with an honest and good heart, who retain it and bring forth fruit with endurance.
 The lamp – Nothing is secret 16No one who has lit a lamp covers it with a lid, or puts it under a bed.
 Instead, it is put on a stand so that those who enter in may see the light! 17Nothing is hiddenb that will not be revealed.
 Nothing is secretc that will not be known and come to light.
 18Therefore, be careful how you hear.
 Whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what he thinks he has will be taken from him.
” The Lord’s true family 19His mother and brothersd came to him, but they could not come near him because of the crowd.
 20It was reported to him, “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, desiring to see you.
” 21But Jesuse answered, “My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and do it.
” The calming of the storm 22On one of those days, he entered into a boat with his disciples and said to them, “Let us go over to the other side of the lake.
” And so, they launched out.
 23But as they were sailing, Jesusf fell asleep.
 A windstorm came down on the lake, and they were taking on dangerous amounts of water.
 24His disciples came to him and woke him up, saying, “Master, master, we are a Isaias (Isaiah) 6:9 Greek krupto.
n from which we have the word ‘cryptography’ c Greek avpo,krufon from which we have the word ‘apocrypha’ d See Appendix E e Greek “he” f Greek “he” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 174 perishing!” Jesusa awoke, rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and it was calm.
b 25He said to them, “Where is your faith?” In fear and amazement, they said to one another, “Who is this, then, that he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?” 26Then, they reached the country of the Gadarenes, which is opposite Galilee.
 The healing of a demoniac – The demons expelled in the herd of swine 27When Jesus stepped ashore, a man from the town who had had demons for a long time came to meet him.
 cThis man wore no clothes, and he did not live in a house, but in the tombs.
 28When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him.
 With a loud voice, he said, “What do you want from me,d Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me!” 29(For Jesus was commanding the unclean spirit to come out of the man).
 The unclean spirit had often seized the man and he was kept under guard, bound with chains and fetters.
 [But he had been] breaking the chains and was driven by the demon into deserted places.
 30Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” He replied, “Legion,” for many demons had entered into him.
 31And they begged him not to command them to go into the abyss.
 32Now, there was a large herd of swine feeding on the mountain, and the demonse begged him that he would allow them to enter into those [pigs]; and Jesus allowed them.
 33The demons came out from the man and entered into the pigs.
 Then the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and [the swine] were drowned.
 34When the people who fed the pigs saw what had happened, they fled and told the story in the city and in the countryside.
 35Then, people went out to see what had happened.
 They came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone out.
 He was sitting at Jesus’ feet, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
 36Those who had seen it told the people how the demon-possessed man had been delivered.
f 37All the people of the surrounding country of the Gadarenes asked Jesusg to depart from them, because they were extremely afraid.
 So he got into the boat and went back.
 38The man from whom the demons had gone out begged to go with Jesus, but Jesus sent him away, saying: 39“Return to your house and proclaim what great things God has done for a Greek “he” See Psalms 107:29 / 106 LXX c Some translations connect the “for a long time” clause with the second part of the verse (the fact that the man wore no clothes, etc) instead of the first part (how long he had been possessed) d Literally “What do I have to do with you” e Greek “they” f Greek evsw,qh (may also mean “saved / rescued /delivered / healed”) g Greek “him” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ you.
” So the man went on his way, proclaiming throughout the whole city what great things Jesus had done for him.
 The healing of Jairus’ daughter and of the woman with an issue of blood 40When Jesus returned, the multitude welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him.
 41And behold, a man named Jairus came, and he was a ruler of the synagogue.
 He fell down at Jesus’ feet and begged him to come to his house 42because he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, who was dying.
 But as Jesus went, the crowd pressed against him.
 43There was a woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years and who had spent all she had on physicians,a but she could not be healed by any.
 44She came behind him and touched the fringeb of his cloak.
 Immediately, the flow of her blood stopped.
 45Jesus said, “Who touched me?” As everyone was denying it, Peter and those with him said, “Master, the people are crowding and pressing against you,c and you ask, ‘Who touched me?’” 46But Jesus said, “Someone has touched me, for I perceived that power has gone out from me.
” 47When the woman saw that she was not hidden, she came forth trembling.
 Falling down before Jesus, in the presence of all the people, she confessed to him why she had touched him, and how she had immediately been healed.
 48He said to her, “Daughter, be of good cheer! Your faith has made you well.
 Go in peace.
” 49While Jesus was still speaking, someone came from the ruler of the synagogue’s house, saying to him, “Your daughter is dead.
 Do not trouble the Teacher.
” 50But when Jesus heard it, he answered, “Do not be afraid! Only believe, and she will be healed.
” 51When Jesus arrived at the house, he did not allow anyone to enter in, except Peter, John, James, as well as the father of the child and her mother.
 52All were weeping and mourning the girl,d but Jesus said, “Do not weep! She is not dead, but sleeping.
” 53But they mocked him, knowing that she was dead.
 54Jesus put them all outside, and taking the girl by the hand, he called, “Child, arise!” 55Her spirite returned, and she immediately got up.
 He ordered that something to a A few manuscripts omit “and who had spent all she had on physicians” Or “tassel” c CT omits “and you say, who touched me?” d Greek “her” e Or “breath” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 176 eat should be given to her.
 56Her parents were amazed, but he commanded them to tell no one what had been done.
 9 The commission of the Twelve apostles Calling his twelve disciplesa together, Jesus gave them power and authority over all demons, and [power] to cure diseases.
 2He then sent them forth to preach the Kingdom of God and to heal the sick.
 3Jesus said to them, “Do not take anything for the journey - no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, no extra tunic.
 4Whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave from that place.
 5Wherever people do not welcome you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave their town, as a testimony against them.
” 6They departed and went throughout the villages, preaching the Good News, and healing everywhere.
 Herod’s view of Jesus 7Now, Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by Jesus.
 He was very perplexed, because it was said by some that John had risen from the dead.
 8Some said that Elias (Elijah) had appeared, and others that one of the old prophets had risen again.
 9Herod said, “I have beheaded John, but who is this about whom I hear such things?” And he desired to see Jesus.
 10When they returned, the apostles told him what things they had done.
 Then, Jesus took them with him, and they withdrew to a deserted place [which was part] of a city called Bethsaida.
b The feeding of the five thousand 11However, the crowd perceived this and followed him.
 Jesus welcomed them, speaking to them about the Kingdom of God, and curing those who needed healing.
 12Late in the afternoon, the Twelve came to him and said, “Send the people away, so that they may go into the surrounding villages and farms to find lodging and get food, for we are here in a deserted place.
” 13But Jesus said to them, “You give them something to eat.
” They replied, “We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we go and buy food for all these people.
” 14(For they were about five thousand men).
 Jesus then said to his disciples, “Make them sit down in groups of about fifty each.
” 15They did so, and made them all sit down.
 16He took the five a b Other manuscripts read “the Twelve” instead of “his twelve disciples” Other translations “And he took them, and withdrew in private to a city called Bethsaida” ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitude.
 17Everybody ate, and all were satisfied.
 The disciples gathered up twelve baskets of broken pieces that were left over.
 Peter’s confession of faith – The Lord’s passion is announced 18Once, as Jesusa was praying alone and the disciples were with him, he asked them, “Who do the multitudes say that I am?” 19They answered, “‘John the Baptizer,’ but others say, ‘Elias (Elijah),’ and others, that one of the old prophets is risen again.
” 20Jesus said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered, “The Christ of God!” 21But he warned them and commanded them to tell this to no one, 22saying, “The Son of Man must suffer many things, be rejected by the presbyters, the chief priests and the scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up.
” Requirements for discipleship 23Jesus said to all, “Anyone who desires to come after me must deny himself, take up his cross daily,b and follow me.
 24For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever will lose his life for my sake will save it.
 25Indeed what profit is there if someone gains the whole world but loses or surrendersc his own self? 26If anyone is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his glory, and in the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.
 27But I tell you the truth: There are some who stand here who will in no way taste of death, until they see the Kingdom of God.
” The Lord’s transfiguration 28About eight days after these sayings, Jesus took with him Peter, John, and James, and went up to the mountain to pray.
 29As he was praying, the appearance of his face was altered, and his clothing became white and dazzling.
 30And behold, two men were talking with him, who were Moses and Elias (Elijah).
 31They appeared in glory and spoke of his departure,d which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem.
 32Now, Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep, but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men who a Greek “he” Some manuscripts omit “daily” c Or “forfeits / gives up” d Literally, “exodus” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 178 stood with him.
 33As Moses and Elias (Elijah)a were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good for us to be here! Let us make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elias (Elijah).
” He did not know what he was saying.
 34While Peter was saying these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.
 35A voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is my beloved Son.
 Listen to him!” 36And after the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone.
 They kept silent and told no one in those days of what they had seen.
 The healing of a demon-possessed boy 37On the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a great multitude met him.
 38A man from the crowd called out, saying, “Teacher, I beg you to look at my son, for he is my only child.
 39Behold, when a spirit seizes him, he suddenly cries out and it convulses him so that he foams [at the mouth].
 It scarcely ever leaves him and is breaking him.
 40I begged your disciples to cast it out, but they could not.
” 41Jesus answered, “Faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here.
” 42While the boy was still coming, the demon threw him down and convulsed him violently.
 But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
 43And all were astonished at the majesty of God.
 The Lord announces his passion While all were marveling at all that Jesus did, he said to his disciples, 44“Let these words sink into your ears, for the Son of Man will be delivered up into the hands of men.
” 45But they did not understand this saying; it was concealed from them so that they should not understand its meaning, and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
 Who is greatest in the Kingdom 46A dispute sprang up among them about which [one] of them was the greatest.
 47Jesus, perceiving the reasoning of their hearts, took a little child and set him by his side.
 48He then said to them, “Whoever receives this little child in my Name receives me.
 Whoever receives me receives him who sent me.
 For whoever is the least among you all, this one will be great.
” a Greek “they” ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ The exorcist who used the Name of Jesus 49John said, “Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your Name, and we tried to stopa him because he does not follow with us.
” 50Jesus us.
” said to him, “Do not forbidb him, for whoever is not against us is for c The journey to Jerusalem – Would-be disciples 51It came to pass, when the days were near for him to be taken up, that he resolutely set his faced to go to Jerusalem, 52and he sent messengers ahead of him.
e They went and entered into a village of the Samaritans in order to make preparation for him.
 53But the people did not receive him because he was heading for Jerusalem.
 54When his disciples James and John saw this, they said, “Lord, do you want us to command fire to come down from heaven and destroyf them, just as Elias (Elijah) did?” 55But Jesus turned around and rebuked them, “You do not know of what kind of spirit you are.
g 56For the Son of Man did not come to destroy people’s lives but to save them.
” They went on to another village.
 57As they went on the way, a certain man said to him, “I want to follow you wherever you go, Lord!” 58Jesus said to him, “The foxes have holes, and the birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.
” 59He said to another, “Follow me!” But the man said, “Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.
” 60But Jesus replied, “Leave the dead to bury their own dead.
 But you go and announce the Kingdom of God.
” 61Another also said, “I want to follow you, Lord, but first allow me to say goodbye to those who are at my house!” 62But Jesus said to him, “No one who has put his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the Kingdom of God.
” a Or “we forbade him” Or “prevent” c See also Luke 11:23 d Or “determined to go” e Literally “before his face” f Or “consume” g Other manuscripts omit “you do not know of what kind of spirit you are.
” Here, PT is supported by codex Bezae (D) as well as by Epiphanius, Chrysostom, and Theodoret.
 CT omits “You do not know of what kind of spirit you are.
 For the Son of Man did not come to destroy people’s lives but to save them.
” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 180 10 The seventy apostles After these things, the Lord also appointed seventya others and sent them two by two ahead of himb into every city and place where he was about to go.
 2Jesus said to them, “The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few.
 Pray therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he may send out laborers into his harvest.
 3Go on your ways, [but] be aware that I am sending you out as lambs among wolves.
 4Do not carry a purse, a wallet, or sandals.
 Do not greet anyone on the way.
 5Whatever house you enter, first say, ‘Peace be to this house.
’ 6If a followerc of peace is there, your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you.
 7Remain in that house, eating and drinking what they will give [you], for the laborer deserves his wages.
 Do not go from house to house.
 8Whatever town you enter and if the people welcome you, eat whatever is set before you.
 9Heal the sick who are there and tell them, ‘The Kingdom of God has come near to you!’ 10But if you enter into any town and people there do not welcome you, go out into its streets and say, 11‘Even the dust from your city that clings to us, we wipe off against you.
 Nevertheless, know this, that the Kingdom of God has come near to you!’ 12I tell you, it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for such a city.
 Woe to Chorazin and Bethsaida 13Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the deeds of power which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
 14But in the judgment, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for you.
 15You, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? No, you will be brought down to hadesd! 16Whoever listens to you listens to me, and whoever rejects you rejects me.
 Whoever rejects me rejects the one who sent me.
” Return of the seventy – Satan falling like lightning 17The seventye returned with joy, saying, “Lord, even the demons are subject to us in your Name!” a Other manuscripts read “seventy-two” Literally “before his face” c Or “son” d Hades is the realm of the dead.
 The upper part of hades was considered to be luminous and it was called “paradise” or “Abraham’s bosom.
” Hades is not to be confused with hell (Gehenna) which is the final place or state of the damned (“the lake of fire”).
 The KJV translated hades as hell which may have been acceptable at the time but which causes great confusion today, including in liturgical translations.
 e CT reads “seventy-two” - TR, MT and PT all agree with “seventy” which was the number of the sons of the Most High God in Deuteronomy 32:8 LXX and DSS.
 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 18Jesus said to them, “I saw Satan having fallen like lightning from heaven!a I give you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy.
 Nothing will in any way hurt you.
 20Nevertheless, do not rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you; but rejoice that your names are writtenb in heaven.
” 19Behold, The Lord praises the Father 21In that same hour, Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit and said, “I confessc you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earthd, that you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.
 Yes, Father, for doing so was well-pleasing in your sight.
” 22Turning to the disciples, he said, “All things have been delivered to me by my Father.
 No one knows who the Son is, except the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.
” 23Turning to the disciples, Jesus said privately, “Blessed are the eyes which see the things that you see! 24For I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see what you see, but they did not see them; and to hear what you hear, but they did not hear them.
” The greatest commandment - The parable of the good samaritan 25Behold, an expert in the law stood up and put him to the test, saying, “Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?” 26Jesus answered, “What is written in the law? How do you read it?” 27The man answered, “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all your mind;e and your neighbor as yourself.
”f 28Jesus said to him, “You have answered correctly.
 Do this, and you will live.
” 29But the lawyer, desiring to justify himself, asked Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?” 30Jesus answered, “A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho when he fell into the hands of robbers.
 They stripped him of his clothes and beat him.
 Then they went away, leaving him half-dead.
 31By a Compare Revelation 12:7-9 Compare Revelation 13:8 c The Greek VExomologou/mai, may also be translated “bless, praise, acknowledge, thank” d Compare Tobit 7:17 e Deuteronomy 6:5 f Leviticus 19:18 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 182 chance, a certain priest was going down that way.
 But when the priest saw him, he passed by on the other side.
 32In the same way, a Levite also came to the place, but when he saw the beaten man, he [also] passed by on the other side.
 33Now, a certain Samaritan was traveling and arrived at the spot where the man was.
 When the Samaritan saw the wounded man,a he was moved with compassion, 34came to him, and wrapped his wounds, pouring on oil and wine.
 He placed the man on his own animal and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
 35On the next day, when he was leaving, he took out two denarii and gave them to the host, saying to him, ‘Take care of him.
 Whatever you spend beyond that, I will pay you back when I return.
’ 36Now, which one of these three do you think seemed to be a neighbor to the man who fell among the robbers?” 37The lawyer replied, “The one who showed mercy on him!” Then Jesus said to him, “Go and do likewise.
” Martha and Mary 38As they went on their way, Jesus entered into a village, and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
 39She had a sister called Mary who also sat at Jesus’ feet and listened to his word.
 40However, Martha was distracted with much serving.
 She came up to Jesus, and said, “Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Ask her to help me!” 41But Jesus answered, “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things! 42Yet, one thing is needed! Mary has chosen the good part, and it will not be taken away from her.
” 11 ‘The Lord’s Prayer’b One day, when Jesusc had finished praying in a certain place, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.
” 2Jesus said to them, “When you pray, say: ‘Our Father in heaven,d May your Name be kept holy! May your Kingdom come! a Greek “him” Please see the presentation of the Lord’s Prayer in Matthew’s gospel which has one column for the translation and one for the liturgical version.
 c Greek “he” d CT omits “in heaven” and “Our” before “Father” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ May your will be done on Earth, as it is in heaven.
a 3 Give us day by day our daily bread.
 4 Forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is indebted to us; and leadb us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.
’c Persistence in prayer 5He said to them, “Suppose [that] one of you has a friend.
 You go to this friend’s house at midnight and tell him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves of bread! 6A friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set before him.
’ 7Then, the one inside answers and says, ‘Do not bother me! The door is now shut and my children are with me in bed.
 I cannot get up and give you anything!’ 8I tell you, although he will not get up and give food to him because they are friends, yet because of the requester’sd bold persistence, he will get up and give him as much as he needs.
 9I tell you, keep asking, and it will be given you.
 Keep seeking, and you will find.
 Keep knocking, and it will be opened to you.
 10For everyone who asks receives.
 Whoever seeks finds.
 To the one who knocks it will be opened.
 11Who among you fathers, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone?e Or if a son asks for a fish, the father will not give him a snake instead of a fish, will he? 12Or if a son asks for an egg, the father will not give him a scorpion, will he? 13If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give [the]f Holy Spirit to those who ask him!” 14Jesus was casting out a demon which was mute, and when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke and the people were amazed.
 15However, some of them said, “He casts out demons by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons!” 16Others put him to the test and asked from him a sign from heaven.
 17But Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation.
 A house divided against itself falls.
 18If Satan is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul! 19But if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore, they will be your judges.
 20However, if it is by the finger of God that I cast out demons, then the Kingdom of God has come to you! a CT omits this clause Or “bring” c CT omits this clause d Greek “his” e CT omits the first part of the verse f The Greek actually uses the indefinite b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 184 21When a strong man is fully armed and guards his own house, his goods are safe.
 22But when someone stronger attacks him and overpowers him, he takes away the armor in which the man trusted and divides up the spoils.
a 23Whoever is not with me is against me! Whoever does not gather with me scatters! An evil spirit leaves and returns 24When an unclean spirit has gone out of a person, he passes through dry places, seeking rest.
 But finding no rest, the unclean spirit says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came out.
’ 25When he returns, he finds it swept and put in order.
 26He then goes and brings seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they enter in and dwell there.
 The last state of that person becomes worse than the first.
” Great and greater blessedness 27As Jesus was saying these things, a womanb called out from the crowd and said to him, “Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts which nursed you!” 28But Jesus said, “Yes, and more than that,c blessed are those who hear the word of God and keep it.
” The sign of Jonah 29As the crowds were increasing, he began to say, “This is an evil generation; it asks for a sign.
 No sign will be given to this generation except the sign of Jonah the prophet.
 30For just as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, the Son of Man will also be a sign to this generation.
 31The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment along with the people of this generation, and she will condemn them: for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, someone greater than Solomon is here! 32The people of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation and they will condemn it because they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, someone greater than Jonah is here.
 The lamp of the body 33No one who has lit a lamp puts it in a cellar or under a basket! Instead, it is placed on a stand so that those who come in may see the light.
 34The a Compares Revelation 12; 20 Or “a certain woman” c Greek menou/n (compar Romans 9:20; 10:18; Philippians 3:8).
 The meaning “on the contrary” is extremely unlikely.
 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ lamp of the body is the eye! Therefore, when your eye is healthy,a your whole body is also full of light; but when it is evil, your body also is full of darkness! 35And so, see whether the light that is in you is not darkness.
 36If your whole body is full of light, having no dark part, it will be completely full of light, as when the lamp with its bright shining gives you light.
” About the Pharisees 37Now, as Jesus was speaking, a certain Pharisee asked him to have dinner with him.
 Jesus went in, and reclined at the table.
 38When the Pharisee saw it, he was astonished that Jesus had not first washed himself before dinner.
 39But the Lord said to him, “You Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and platter, but your inside is full of extortion and wickedness.
 40You fools! Did not the one who made the outside also make the inside? 41But as for what is inside you, be generous to the needy, and behold, all things will be clean to you.
 42But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, but you bypassb justice and the love of God.
 You should have done these while not leaving the other undone.
 43Woe to you Pharisees! For you love the best seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces.
 44Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!c You are like hidden graves, and people who walk over them do not [even] know it.
” 45One of the experts in the law exclaimed, “Teacher, in saying this you insult us also.
” 46Jesus said, “Woe to you lawyers also! For you load men with burdens that are difficult to carry, and you yourselves will not even lift one finger to help carry those burdens! 47Woe to you! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
 48And so, you testify and consent to the works of your fathers! For they killed the prophets,d and you build their tombs.
 49Therefore, the wisdom of God also said, ‘I will send them prophets and apostles.
 Some of them they will kill and persecute, 50so that the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world may be required of this generation; 51from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariahe who perished between the altar and the sanctuary.
’ Yes, I tell you that this generation will be charged with this blood.
f 52Woe to you experts of the law! You have taken away the key to knowledge; you yourselves have not entered, and you have hindered those who were entering.
” a Or “sound / clear / generous” Or “neglect” c CT omits “scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites” d Greek “them” e Compare Protoevangelium of James but also Isaias (Isaiah) 8:2.
 The Orthodox tradition normally favors the identification of this Zacharias / Zachariah with the father of John the Baptist.
 f Greek “it” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 186 53As he said these things to them, the scribes and Pharisees began a furious attack on him and tried to force answers from him on many questions.
 54They were lying in wait for him and seeking to catch him in something he might say,a in order to accuse him.
 12 Warning about the Pharisees – Nothing is hidden Meanwhile, a crowd of many thousands had gathered, to the point that they trampled on each other.
 Jesus began to speak, first of all to his disciples, “Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.
 2Nothing is covered up that will not be revealed; or hidden, that will not be known.
 3Therefore, whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light.
 What you have whispered in the ear in the inner rooms will be proclaimed on the housetops.
 Persecutions – True fear 4I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body and after that can do no more.
 5But I will warnb you whom you should fear: fear the one who after he has killed, has [also] power to cast into Gehenna.
c Yes, I tell you, fear him! 6Are not five sparrows sold for two small coinsd? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
 7Indeed, the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
 Therefore, do not be afraid! You are of more value than many sparrows.
 8I tell you, whoever confessese me before men, the Son of Man will also acknowledge before the angels of God.
 9But whoever denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of the angels of God.
 The unforgivable sin 10Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but those who blaspheme against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
 11When you are brought before the synagogues, rulers, and authorities, do not be anxious about how you will defend yourselves or what you will say; 12for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that same hour what you must say.
” 13Someone from the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to share the inheritance with me!” a Other manuscripts omit “in order to accuse him” Or “show” c Or “hell” d An assarion was a small copper coin worth about an hour’s wages for an agricultural laborer.
 e Or “acknowledges” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 14But Jesus replied, “Friend,a who made me a judge or arbitrator over you?” said to them, “Beware! Keep yourselves from covetousness, for a person’s life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions.
” 15He The rich fool 16Then Jesus told them a parable, saying, “The ground of a certain rich man produced in abundance.
 17He thought to himself, ‘What will I do? I do not have room to store my crops!’ 18Then the man said, ‘This is what I will do: I will pull down my barns, build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.
 19Then I will say to my soul, “Soul, you have many goods stored up for many years.
 Take your ease, eat, drink, and be merry!”’b 20But God said to him, ‘You fool! Tonight your soul is demanded of you.
c The things which you have prepared, to whom will they belong?’ 21This is how it is when someone amasses treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.
” Anxiety – Reliance on God 22Jesus said to his disciples, “Therefore, I tell you not to be anxious about your life, what you will eat; or about your body, what you will wear.
 23Life is more than food and the body is more than clothing! 24Consider the ravens: they do not sow, they do not reap, they do not have a warehouse or barn, and [yet] God feeds them.
 And how much more valuable you are than birds! 25Which one of you by worrying can add a single day to his life?d 26If you are not able to accomplish even the smallest things, why then are you anxious about the rest? 27Consider the lilies, how they grow.
 They do not toil or spin; yet, I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
 28But if this is how God clothes the grass in the field, which today exists and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, you of little faith? 29Do not set your hearts on what you will eat or drink; do not be apprehensive.
 30It is the pagan world that runs after all these things, and your Father understands that you need them.
 31Seek rather the Kingdom of God and all these things will be added to you.
 32Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
 33Sell your possessions and give to those in need.
 Make for yourselves purses which do not grow old, a treasure in the heavens that does not fail, where no thief can reach and where moth cannot destroy.
 34For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
 a Or “man” Compare Sirach 11:19 c Literally “they require your soul from you” d Or “can add a cubit to his height?” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 188 Well-prepared servants 35Be dressed in readinessa and keep your lamps burning.
 36Be like people waiting for their masterb to return from the wedding feast, ready to open the door as soon as he comes and knocks.
 37Blessed are those servants whom the lord will find watching when he comes! Amen, I tell you: he will dress himself [to serve], make them recline, and he will come to serve them! 38They will be blessed if the master comes in the second or third watch, and finds them doing so.
 39But know this, that if the master of the house had known whenc the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and not allowed his house to be broken into.
 40Therefore, be ready also, for the Son of Man is coming in an hour when you do not expect him.
” 41Peter said to him, “Lord, are you telling this parable [only] to us, or to everyone?” 42The Lord replied, “Who, then, is the faithful and wise steward whom his master will set over his household to give [his people] their allowance of food at the proper time? 43Blessed is that servant whom his lord will find doing so when he returns.
 44Truly I tell you, he will set this servant over all that he has.
 45But what if the servant says in his heart, ‘My lord is late in returning’ and begins to beat his fellow-servants, both men and women, and also to eat, drink and become drunk? 46Then the lord of that servant will come in a day when he is not expecting him, and in an hour that he does not know.
 He will cut the servant in two and assign him a place with the unbelievers.
 47Such a servant, who knew his lord’s will and yet did not prepare or do what the master wanted will be beaten with many stripes.
 48But a servant who did not know and did things worthy of punishmentd will be beaten with few stripes.
 From everyone to whom much is given, much will be required; and from whoever was entrusted with much, much will be asked.
 Fire, division, not peace upon the earth 49I have come to bring fire upon the earth, and how I wish it were blazing already! 50But now, I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how distressed I am until it is accomplished! 51Do you think that I have come to bring peace on earth? No, I tell you, but rather division.
 52For from now on, there will be five in a divided house, three against two, and two against three.
 53They will be divided, father against son, son against father; mother a Literally “let your loins be girded” Or “Lord” (ku,rioj) c Literally “in what hour” d Literally “stripes” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ against daughter, and daughter against her mother; mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
”a Interpreting the signs of the time – Making peace with opponents 54Jesus also said to the multitudes, “When you see a cloud rising from the west, you immediately say, ‘A shower is coming,’ and so it happens.
 55When a south wind blows, you say, ‘There will be a scorching heat,’ and it happens.
 56You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and sky, but how is it that you do not interpret this [present] time? 57Why do you not judge for yourselves what is right? 58For when you are going with your adversary before the magistrate, as you are on the way, do your utmost to be released from him, for fear that perhaps he will drag you to the judge, and the judge might deliver you to the officer, and the officer might throw you into prison.
 59I tell you, you will by no means get out of there, until you have paid the very last penny.
b ” 13 Call to repentance At that time, some [Jews] were present who told Jesus about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
 2Jesus answered, “Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered such things? 3I tell you, no, but unless you repent, you will all perish in the same way! 4Or those eighteen who died when the tower in Siloam fell.
 Do you think that they were worse offenders than all those who live in Jerusalem? 5I tell you, no, but, unless you repent, you will all perish as they did!” The parable of the unproductive fig tree 6He then said this parable.
 “A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard.
 He came to look for fruit on it, but found nothing.
 7He said to the vine dresser, ‘Behold, I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree for three years, and found none.
 Cut it down! Why does it waste the soil?’ 8The gardenerc answered, ‘Lord, let it be for this year also, until I dig around it and fertilize it.
 9If it bears fruit, fine; but if not, after that, you can cut it down.
’” a Micah 7:6 Literally “lepton.
” A lepton is a very small brass Jewish coin worth half a Roman quadrans each, which is worth a quarter of the copper assarion.
 Lepta are worth less than 1% of an agricultural worker’s daily wages.
 c Greek “he” (a reference to the vine dresser or gardener) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 190 The healing of crippled woman on the Sabbath 10Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath day.
 there was a woman who had had a spirit of infirmity for eighteen years.
 She was bent over and could not straighten herself up.
 12When Jesus saw her, he called her, and said to her, “Woman, you are freed from your infirmity!” 13He laid his hands on her and immediately, she stood up straight and glorified God.
 11Behold, 14However, the ruler of the synagogue was indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath.
 He said to the crowd, “There are six days in which people should work! Therefore, come on those days and be healed, not on the Sabbath day!” 15Then, the Lord answered him, “You hypocrites! Does not each one of you free his ox or his donkey from the stall on the Sabbath, and lead it out to water? 16Should not this woman, a daughter of Abraham who was bound by Satan for eighteen years, be freed from this bondage on the Sabbath day?” 17As he said these things, all his adversaries were put to shame and all the people rejoiced over all the glorious things that were done by him.
 The mustard seed – The yeast – The narrow door 18Jesus said, “What is the Kingdom of God like? To what shall I compare it? 19It is like a grain of mustard seed which someone picked up and planted in his own garden.
 It grew and became a large tree, and the birds of the air found shelter in its branches.
” 20Again he said, “To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God? 21It is like yeast, which a woman took and hid in three measuresa of flour, until it was all leavened.
” 22Jesus was on his way through cities and villages, teaching and traveling onward to Jerusalem.
 23Someone asked him, “Lord, are those who are saved [only] a few?” Jesus replied, 24“Do your utmost to enter in by the narrow door! For I tell you that many will try to enter, but they will not be able.
 25Once the master of the house has risen up and shut the door, you will stand outside and knock on the door, saying: ‘Lord, Lord, open to us!’ But then, he will answer, ‘I do not know you or where you come from!’ 26Then you will start saying, ‘We ate and drank in your company and you taught in our streets!’ 27But the masterb will reply, ‘I tell you, I do not know where you come from! Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.
’ 28In that place, there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, a b Literally, three sata, about 39 liters or about 10 gallons Greek “he” ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ Jacob, and all the prophets in the Kingdom of God, and yourselves being thrown outside.
 29Peoplea will come from the east, west, north, and south, and they will have a placeb in the Kingdom of God.
 30And behold, some are last who will be first and some are first who will be last.
” Herod wants to kill the Lord – Lament over Jerusalem 31On that same day, some Pharisees came and said to Jesus,c “Leave this place and go somewhere else, for Herod wants to kill you!” 32Jesus replied, “Go and tell that fox, ‘Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I fulfill my end.
d 33Nevertheless, I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the next day, for it cannot be that a prophet should perish outside of Jerusalem.
’ 34Jerusalem, Jerusalem, [you] that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How often have I longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were not willing! 35Behold, your house is left to you desolate! I tell you, you will not see me, until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the Name of the Lord!’”e 14 The healing of a man with dropsy on the Sabbath day Now, it happened that Jesus went into the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat bread, and they were watching him [closely].
 2And behold, a certain man who had swollen arms and legsf was [standing] in front of him.
 3Jesus answered and spoke to the experts in the law and to the Pharisees, saying, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?” 4But they remained silent.
 So taking hold of the man, Jesus healed him and sent him away.
 5He answered them, “Which of you, if your song or ox falls into a well on a Sabbath day, would not immediately pull it out?” 6And a they could not answer him regarding these things.
 Greek “they” Literally “sit down” c Greek “him” d Or “reach my purpose” e Psalms 118:26 / 117 LXX f Literally “hydropsy” g TR reads “donkey” instead of “son” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 192 Seating at banquets: about self-exaltation 7When Jesus noticed how people chose the best seats, he told the guest a parable, saying, 8“When you are invited by anyone to a marriage feast, do not sit in the best seat.
 It could be that someone more honorable than you might have been invited by the host,a 9and he who invited both of you would come and tell you, ‘Make room for this person.
’ Then, with shame, you would proceed to take the lowest place.
 10Instead, when you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place.
 And so, when the host comes, he may tell you, ‘Friend, move up higher!’ Then you will be honored in the presence of all who sit at the table with you.
 11For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
” 12Jesus also said to the one who had invited him, “When you make a dinner or a supper, do not call your friends, brothers, kinsmen or rich neighbors because they might return the favor and pay you back.
 13Instead, when you give a feast, ask the poor, the maimed, the lame, or the blind [to come].
 14Then, you will be blessed, because they do not have the means to pay you back.
 For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous.
” The parable of the great feast or banquet 15When one of those who sat at the table with him heard these things, he said to Jesus, “Blessed is the one who will feast in the Kingdom of God!” 16But Jesus replied, “A certain man gave a great banquet and invited many people.
 17At supper time, he sent out his servant to tell those who were invited, ‘Come, for everything is ready now!’ 18But they all began to make excuses.
 The first told him, ‘I have bought a field, and I must go and see it.
 Please have me excused!’ 19Another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen and I must go try them out.
 Please have me excused!’ 20Another said, ‘I have just been married, and therefore I cannot come!’ 21That servant came back and reported these things to his lord.
 At this, the master of the house became angry and said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and alleys of the city, and bring in the poor, the maimed, the blind, and the lame.
’ 22The servant said, ‘Lord, it is done as you commanded, and there is still room!’ a Greek “him” ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 23The lord then told the servant, ‘Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel people to come in, so that my house may be filled! 24For I tell you that none of those who were invited will taste of my supper.
’” About discipleship 25Great crowds were now traveling with him.
 He turned and said to them, who comes to me and does not disregarda his own father, mother, wife, children, brothers, and sisters, yes, and his own life also, cannot be my disciple.
 27Whoever does not bear his own cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
 28For which of you, desiring to build a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost, to see if he has enough to complete it? 29Otherwise, when he has laid a foundation and is not able to finish, everyone who sees would begin to mock him, 30saying: ‘This fellow began to build and he was not able to finish!’ 31Or what king, as he goes to encounter another king in war, will not first sit down and consider whether he is able with ten thousand [troops] to meet the one who comes against him with twenty thousand [troops]? 32If he cannot, while the other [king] is still far away, he sends an embassy and asks for the conditions of peace.
 33In the same way, any of you who does not renounce all that he has cannot be my disciple.
 26“Anyone About salt 34Salt is good, but if it becomes tasteless, what can make it salty again? 35It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile and it is thrown out! Anyone who has ears for listening should listen!” 15 The parable of the lost sheep Now, all the tax collectors and sinners were coming close to him to hear him.
 2But the Pharisees and scribes began to grumble, saying, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them!” 3So Jesus told them this parable.
 4“Which one of you, if you had one hundred sheep and lost one of them, would not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness and go after the one that was lost, until he finds it? 5And when he has found it, he carries it on his shoulders, rejoicing! 6Coming home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, telling them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost!’ 7I tell you that in the same way, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous who need no repentance.
 a Or literally “hate” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 194 The parable of the lost coin 8Or what woman, if she had ten drachmaa coins and lost one,b would not light a lamp, sweep the house, and look hard until she finds it? 9And when she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying: ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma coin which I had lost!’ 10Likewise, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents.
” The parable of the prodigal son and the disgruntled brother 11Jesusc said, “A certain man had two sons.
 12The younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of the estate that will come to me.
’ So the father divided his livelihoodd between them.
 13A few days later, the younger son gathered all that he had and traveled to a far country.
 There, he squandered his property, living immorally.
 14When he had spent everything, a severe famine took place in that country, and he began to be in need.
 15He went and hired himself to one of the citizens of that country who sent him into his fields to feed pigs.
 16He wanted to feed himselfe with the husks that the pigs ate, but no one gave him anything.
 17But when he came to himself, he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired servants have bread enough to spare, and I am dying with hunger! 18I will get up, go to my father, and tell him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you! 19I am no longer worthy to be called your son.
 Make me as one of your hired servants.
”’ 20So he set off and went to his father.
 But while he was still at a distance, his father saw him and was moved with compassion.
 He ran, and embraced his son,f and kissed him.
 21Then the son said, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you! I am no longer worthy to be called your son.
’ 22But the father said to his servants, ‘Bring out the firstg robe and put it on him! Put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet! 23Bring the fattened calf, kill it, and let us eat and celebrate; 24for this, my son, was dead, and he is alive again! He was lost and [now he] is found!’ And they began to celebrate.
 25Now, his elder son was in the field.
 As he came near to the house, he heard music and dancing.
 26Calling one of the servants, he asked what was a A drachma coin was worth about 2 days wages for an agricultural laborer.
 Greek text adds “drachma coin” c Greek “he” d Or “property, substance, wealth” e Literally “fill his belly” f Greek “him” g Greek prw,thn.
 Perhaps “best” or a reference to the robe that the son used to wear (“former”).
 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ going on.
 27The servant replied, ‘Your brother has returned! Your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received him back safe and healthy.
’ 28However, the elder son became angry and he would not go in.
 Therefore, his father came out and begged him.
 29But he answered his father, ‘Look, for so many years I have served you, and I have never disobeyed a commandment of yours.
 Yet, you never gave me a goat so that I might celebrate with my friends.
 30But when this, your son, arrived, he who has devoured your living with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him.
’ 31The father said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours! 32But it was fitting to celebrate and to rejoice, for this, your brother, was dead, and is alive again.
 He was lost and is found!’” 16 The parable of the dishonest yet wise manager Jesus also said to his disciples, “There was a certain rich man who had a manager.
 An accusation was made to him that this man was wasting his possessions.
 2He called his manager and told him, ‘What is this that I hear about you? Give an accounting of your stewardship, for you can no longer be [my] steward.
’ 3The manager said within himself, ‘What will I do, seeing that my lord is taking away the management position from me? I do not have strength to dig! I am ashamed to beg! 4I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from management, peoplea may receive me into their houses.
’ 5Calling each one of his lord’s debtors to him, he said to the first, ‘How much do you owe to my lord?’ 6The man replied, ‘A hundred measuresb of oil.
’ The manager said to him, ‘Take your bill, sit down quickly and write fifty.
’ 7Then he said to another, ‘How much do you owe?’ That one replied, ‘A hundred corsc of wheat.
’ The manager said to him, ‘Take your bill, and write eighty.
’ 8His masterd praised the dishonest manager because he had acted wisely, for the children of this world are wiser than the children of the light in [dealing with] their own kind.
 9I tell you, make for yourselves friends by means of unrighteous mammone, so that when it fails you,f you may be received into the eternal dwellings.
 10Whoever is faithful in a very little is a Greek “they” 100 batos is about 395 liters or 104 gallons c 100 cors = about 3,910 liters or 600 bushels d Or “lord” e “Mammon” refers to riches or a false god of wealth f Some translations render “when you fail” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 196 also faithful in much.
 Whoever is dishonest in very little is also dishonest in much.
 11Therefore, if you have not been faithful with unrighteous mammon, who will entrust you with true riches? 12If you have not been faithful in what belongs to another, who will give you what is your own? 13No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate one and love the other; or else he will be attached to one and despise the other.
 You cannot serve God and mammon.
” About the Pharisees – About the Law – About divorce 14The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, also heard all these things, and they scoffed at him.
 15Jesus told them, “You are those who justify yourselves in the sight of people, but God knows your hearts.
 Indeed, what is exalted among people is an abomination in the sight of God.
 16The law and the prophets were [proclaimed] until John [came].
 Since then, the Good News of the Kingdom of God is preached, and everyone enters into it with a struggle.
a 17Yet, it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one tiny stroke of a pen in the law to fall [out].
 18Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another [woman] commits adultery; and the man who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
 The rich man and Lazarus 19Now, there was a certain rich man who was clothed in purple and fine linen, feasting in luxury every day.
 20A certain beggar named Lazarus was laid at his gate, full of sores, 21who desired to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man’s table.
 Yes, even dogs came and licked his sores.
 22It happened that the beggar died and that he was carried away by the angels to Abraham’s bosom.
 The rich man also died, and was buried.
 23In hades,b he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and saw Abraham far off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
c 24He cried and said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, so that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue! For I am in agony in this flame!’ 25But Abraham replied, ‘Son, remember that in your lifetime, you received your good things, and Lazarus, in the same way, bad things.
 But now, he is comforted here and you are in anguish.
 26Besides all this, between us and you a great gulf is fixed, so that those who want to pass from here to you cannot [do so], and that no one may cross over from there to us.
’ 27He said, ‘I ask you therefore, father, that you would send Lazarus to my father’s house; 28for I have five brothers, that he might bear witness to them, so that they would not also come to this place of torment.
’ a Or “everyone is forcing his way into it” (NIV), “everyone who enters does so with violence” (NAB) See note for 10:15 c Or “in his embrace” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 29But Abraham replied to him, ‘They have Moses and the prophets! Let them listen to them!’ 30But he said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if one goes to them from the dead, they will repent.
’ 31Then Abraham said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be convinced if someone rises from the dead.
’” 17 Things that cause sin – About forgiveness Jesus told the disciples, “It is impossible that no occasions of stumbling should come, but woe to the one through whom they come! 2It would be better for such a person to have a millstone hung around the neck and be thrown into the sea, rather than to cause any of these little ones to stumble.
 3Be careful! If your brother sins against you, rebuke him.
 If he repents, forgive him.
 4If he sins against you seven times in the day, and comes back seven times, saying: ‘I repent!’ you must forgive him.
” Faith like mustard seed 5The apostles also said to the Lord, “Increase our faith!” 6The Lord said, “If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed, you would tell this sycamore tree, ‘Be uprooted and transplanted into the sea,’ and it would obey you! The attitude of a servant 7Now, who is there among you, having a servant plowing or sheepherding, that will say when that servanta returns from the field, ‘Come at once and sit down at the table.
’ 8Instead, will you not tell him, ‘Prepare my supper, clothe yourself properly, and serve me while I eat and drink.
 Afterwards, you may eat and drink?’ 9Does the masterb thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded? I think not!c 10So you also, when you have done all those things which you are commanded [to do], say, ‘We are unworthy servants, we have [only] done our duty!’” The healing of ten lepers 11As Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem, it happened that he was passing between [the borders of] Samaria and Galilee.
 12As he entered into a certain village, ten men who were lepers met him, and they stood at a a Greek “he” Greek “he” c οὐ δοκῶ is omitted in some manuscripts (CT) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 198 distance.
 13They lifted up their voices, saying, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!” 14When Jesus saw them, he told them, “Go and show yourselves to the priests.
” And it happened that as they went, they were cleansed.
 15One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
 16He fell on his face at Jesus’ feet, giving him thanks; and this man was a Samaritan.
 17Jesus said, “Were not ten cleansed? But where are the nine [others]? 18Was no one found who came back to glorify God, except for this foreigner?” 19Then Jesus said to him, “Get up and go your way.
 Your faith has healeda you!” The coming of the Kingdom – The coming of the Son of Man 20Being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God would come, Jesus answered them, “The Kingdom of God does not come with observation! 21Neither will people say, ‘Look, here!’ or, ‘Look, there!’ for behold, the Kingdom of God is in your midst.
”b 22Jesus told the disciples, “The days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it.
 23People will tell you, ‘Look, here!’ or ‘Look, there!’ Do not go away or follow [them], 24for as the lightning flashes and lights up the sky from one side to the other, so will the Son of Man be in his day.
 25But first, he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
 26As it happened in the days of Noah, so will it be in the days of the Son of Man.
 27People ate, drank, got married and were given in marriage, until the day when Noah entered into the ship; and the flood came, destroying them all.
 28Likewise, even as it happened in the days of Lot: people ate, drank, bought, sold, planted and built.
 29But in the day that Lot went out from Sodom, it rained fire and sulfur from the sky which destroyed them all.
 30It will be the same in the day that the Son of Man is revealed.
 31In that day, whoever is on the housetop, [having] his goods in the house, should not go down to take them away! Likewise, whoever is in the field should not return.
 32Remember Lot’s wife! 33Whoever seeks to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life will preserve it.
 34I tell you that in that night, there will be two people in one bed! One will be taken, and the other will be left.
 35There will be two grinding grain together.
 One will be taken, and the other will be left.
” 36<Two will be in the field: one will be taken, and the other left.
>c 37In a reply, the disciples asked him, “Where, Lord?” Or “saved you, made you well” Or “within you” - In the context of Jesus addressing the Pharisees, the translation “within you” is less probable than “among you” or “in your midst” c This verse (from Matthew 20:40) is included in PT and TR but absent in CT and MT.
 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ He said to them, “Where the body is, there the eagles will also be assembled.
”a 18 The parable of the persistent widow Jesus also told them a parable [illustrating] that they must always pray and not give up, 2saying: “In a certain city, there was a judge who did not fear God and did not care [about anyone].
 3A widow lived in that city, and she often came to him, saying: ‘Defend me from my adversary!’ 4For a time, he would not [do anything], but after a while, he said to himself, ‘Although I neither fear God nor care for anyone, 5yet because this widow is bothering me, I will defend her, or else she will wear me outb by her continual visits.
’” 6The Lord said, “Listen to what the unrighteous judge has to say! 7Will not God grant justice to his elect who are crying out to him day and night,c although he exercises patience regarding them?d 8I tell you that he will avenge them quickly! And yet, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?” The parable of the Publican and the Pharisee 9Jesus also spoke this parable to certain people who were convinced of their own righteousness and who despised everyone else.
 10“Two men went up into the temple to pray; one was a Pharisee, and the other was a Publican.
e 11The Pharisee stood and prayed by himself, like this: ‘God, I thank you that I am not like the rest of men, dishonest, unrighteous, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.
 12I fast twice a week, I give tithes of all that I earn.
’ 13But the tax collector, standing far aside, would not even lift up his eyes to heaven.
 Instead, he would beat his breast, saying: ‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner!’ 14I tell you, this man, rather than the other, went down to his house justified.
 For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.
” a See notes for Matthew 24:28 Literally “blacken the face,” which may also mean “come and attack” c Compare Revelation 6:9-10 d Or “even though he still delays to help them?” (NJB), “Will he delay long in helping them?” (NRS) e Or “tax collector.
” The word “Publican” is used in the opening verse since it is still frequent in Orthodox usage b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 200 About children and the Kingdom 15People were also bringing their infants to him, so that Jesus might lay handsa on them.
 But when the disciples saw this, they rebuked them.
 16Jesus summoned his disciples and told them, “Allow the little children to come to me, and do not hinder them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
 17Amen, I tell you: whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a little child will in no way enter into it.
” The question of the rich ruler – About riches and renunciation 18A certain rulerb asked him, “Good Teacher, what shallc I do to inherit eternal life?” 19Jesus asked him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good,d except one know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery,’ ‘Do not - God.
 murder,’ ‘Do not steal,’ ‘Do not bear false witness,’ ‘Honor your father and your mother.
’”e 20You 21The ruler replied, “I have observed all these things from my youth.
” 22When Jesus heard this, he said, “You still lack one thing.
 Sell all that you have, distribute it to the poor, and you will have a treasure in heaven.
 Then come, follow me.
” 23But when the man heard these things, he became very distressed because he was very rich.
 24Jesus, seeing that he had become very distressed, said, “How hard it is for those who have wealth to enter into the Kingdom of God! 25Indeed, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for someone who is wealthy to enter into the Kingdom of God!” 26Those who heard this exclaimed, “Then, who can be saved?” 27But Jesus replied, “The things which are impossible with men are possible with God.
” 28Peter said, “Look, we have left everything and followed you!” 29And Jesus said to them, “Amen, I tell you: there is no one who has left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for the sake of the Kingdom of God, 30who will not receive many times more in this [present] time, and in the age to come, eternal life.
” a Or “touch” Or “judge, official, member of a Sanhedrin” c Or “what must I do” d But compare John 10:14 e Exodus 20:12-16; Deuteronomy 5:16-20 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ A third announcement of the passion 31He took the Twelve aside, and said to them, “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written through the prophets concerning the Son of Man will be fulfilled.
 32For he will be delivered to the Gentiles, mocked, mistreated, and spit upon.
 33Having flogged him, they will kill him, and on the third day, he will rise again.
” 34However, they understood none of these things.
 What Jesus was saying was concealed from them, and they did not understand the things that were said.
 The healing of a blind man 35As Jesusa was approaching Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the road, begging.
 36Hearing a crowd going by, he asked what this meant.
 37People told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.
 38He began to cry out, “Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!” 39Then, those who led the way rebuked him, ordering him to be quiet.
 But the blind manb cried out all the more, “You son of David, have mercy on me!” 40Standing still, Jesus commanded that the blind manc be brought to him.
 When the man had come near, Jesus asked him, 41”What do you want me to do?” The man replied, “Lord, that I may see again!” 42Jesus said to him, “Receive your sight.
 Your faith has healed you.
” 43Immediately, the man received his sight and began to follow Jesus, glorifying God.
 When all the people saw this, they praised God.
 19 Zacchaeus the tax collector Jesus entered Jericho and was passing through town.
 2There was a man named Zacchaeus who was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
 3He was trying to see who Jesus was, and could not because of the crowd, because he was short.
 4He ran on ahead and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see Jesus who was [about] to pass that way.
 5When Jesus came to the place, he looked up, saw Zacchaeus, and said to him, “Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for today I must stay at your house!” 6He hurried, came down, and received Jesus with joy.
 7But when the people saw it, they all grumbled, saying, “He has gone in to stay with a man who is a sinner!” a Greek “he” Greek “he” c Greek “he” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 202 8Zacchaeus stood up and said to the Lord, “Behold, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor.
 And if I have wrongfully obtained money from anyone, I restore four times as much!” 9Then Jesus said to him, “Today, salvation has come to this house, because he, too, is a son of Abraham.
 10For the Son of Man came to seek and to save what was lost.
” The parable of the ten mina coins 11As the people heard these things, Jesusa went on to tell [them] a parable because he was near Jerusalem, and they supposed that the Kingdom of God would be revealed immediately.
 12He said therefore, “A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive a kingdom for himself, and then return.
 13So he called ten of his slavesb gave them ten mina coins,c and told them, ‘Do business [with these] until I come.
’ 14But his subjects hated him, and they sent a delegation after him, to say: ‘We do not want this man to reign over us.
’ 15It so happened that when he returned after receiving the kingdom, that he commanded these servants to whom he had given the money to be called to him, so that he might know what they had earned by conducting business.
 16The first came before him, saying: ‘Lord, your mina has made ten more minas!’ 17The kingd said to him, ‘Well done, you good servant! Because you were found faithful with very little, you shall have authority over ten cities.
’ 18The second came, saying: ‘Your mina, Lord, has made five minas!’ 19And so, the king said to him, ‘And you are to be set over five cities.
’ came, saying: ‘Lord, behold, your mina, which I kept laid away in a piece of cloth.
 2I was afraid of you, because you are a strict man! You take up what you did not lay down, and you reap what you did not sow.
’ 20Another 22The king said to him, ‘Out of your own mouth will I judge you, you wicked servant! You perceivede that I was a severe man, taking up what I did not lay down, and reaping what I did not sow.
 23Why then did you not place my money on deposit, and at my coming, I would have collected it with interest on it?’ 24He then said to those who stood by, ‘Take the mina a Greek “he” Or “servants” c 10 minas represented more than 3 years’ wages for an agricultural laborer.
 d Greek “he” e Or “knew” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ away from him, and give it to the one who has the ten minas.
’ they said to the master,a ‘Lord, he [already] has ten minas!’ 25At this, 26‘For I tell you that to everyone who [already] has, more will be given; but from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
 27As for those enemies of mine who did not want me to reign over them here, bring them here and kill them before me.
’” The Entrance into Jerusalem 28Having said these things, Jesus went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
 29It so happened that when he approached Bethsphageb and Bethany, at the mountain that is called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples, 30saying, “Go your way into the village on the other side.
 There, as you enter, you will find a colt tied up, on which no one has ever sat.
 Untie it, and bring it.
 31If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ reply, ‘The Lord needs it!’” 32Those who were sent went away found things exactly as Jesus had told them.
 33As they were untying the colt, its owners asked them, “Why are you untying the colt?” 34They replied, “The Lord needs it!” 35They brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks on the colt, and set Jesus on them.
 36As he went, they [also] spread their cloaks in the way.
 37As Jesus was now approaching, at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the deeds of power which they had seen.
 38[They were] saying, “Blessed is he who is coming, a King in the Name of the Lord!c Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest!” 39And from the multitude, some of the Pharisees said to Jesus, “Teacher, rebuke your disciples!” 40But he answered them, “I tell you that if these were silent, the stones would cry out!” The Lord weeps over Jerusalem 41As Jesusd was drawing near, he saw the city and began to weep over it, “If you, even you, had today recognized what is for your peace! But now, those thingse are hidden from your eyes! 43For the days will come upon you, when your enemies will throw up a fortification against you, surround you, and hem you in on every side.
 44They will crush you and your children within you to the ground.
 They will not leave in you one 42saying, a Greek “him” CT and TR read “Bethpage” instead of “Bethsphage” c Psalms 118:26 / 117 LXX d Greek “he” e Greek “they” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 204 stone [standing] on another, because you did not know the time of your visitation.
” The cleansing of the temple 45Then Jesus entered into the temple, and he began to drive out those who bought and sold in it, 46saying to them, “It is written, ‘My house is a house of prayer,’a but you have made it a ‘den of robbers!’”b 47He was teaching every day in the temple, but the chief priests, the scribes and the leading men among the people were looking for a way to destroy him.
 48However, they could not find a way to do so because all the people were captured by every word that he said.
 20 By what authority It happened on one of those days, as he was teaching the people in the temple and preaching the Good News, that the cpriests and scribes came to him with the presbyters.
 2They asked him, “Tell us: by what authority do you do these things? Who is giving you this authority?” 3He answered them, “I too will ask you one question.
 Tell me: 4the baptism of John, was it from heaven,d or from men?” 5They discussed it among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will reply, ‘Why then did not you believe him?’ 6But if we say, ‘From men,’ all the people will stone us because they are convinced that John was a prophet.
” 7So they answered that they did not know where it was from.
 8Then Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.
” The parable of the tenant farmers 9He began to tell the people this parable.
 “A certain man planted a vineyard, and rented it out to some farmers, and went into another country for a long time.
 10At the proper season, he sent a servant to the farmers to collect his share of the fruit of the vineyard.
 But the farmers beat the servant and sent him away with nothing.
e 11The ownerf then sent yet another servant, and they also beat him, treated him with contempt, and a Isaias (Isaiah) 56:7 Jeremiah 7:11 c CT and TR add “chief” d A common Jewish circumlocution to avoid direct references to God and his Name e Or “empty” f Greek “he” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ sent him away empty.
 12The ownera sent yet a third [servant], and they also wounded him, and threw him out.
 13Then, the lord of the vineyard thought, ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son! It may be that seeing him, they will respect him.
’ 14But when the farmers saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying: ‘This is the heir! Come, let us kill him, so that the inheritance may be ours.
’ 15So, they threw the sonb out of the vineyard, and killed him.
 Now, what will the lord of the vineyard do to them? 16He will come and destroy these farmers, and he will give the vineyard to others.
” When the peoplec heard this, they exclaimed, “May it never be!” 17But Jesus looked at them, and said, “Then what is this that is written: ‘The stone which the builders rejected, Has become the chief cornerstone?’d 18 Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, and it will crush to dust whoever it falls on.
 About paying taxes to Caesar 19The chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to lay hands on him that very hour, but they feared the people because they knew that he had spoken this parable against them.
 20They watched him and sent out spies who pretended to be righteous in order to trap him in something he might say, so that they might hand him over to the power and authority of the governor.
 21They asked him, “Teacher, we know that you say and teach what is right, and that you are not partial to anyone but truly teach the way of God.
 22Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?” 23But Jesus perceived their trickery and said to them, “Why are you testing me?e 24Show me a denarius! Whose image and inscription are on it?” They answered, “Caesar’s.
” 25So Jesus said to them, “Then, give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar, and [give] to God what belongs to God!” 26And they were not able to ensnare him in his words before the people.
 They marveled at his answer and remained silent.
 a Greek “he” Greek “him” c Greek “they” d Psalms 118:22 / 117 LXX e CT omits “Why are you testing me?” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 206 The Sadducees question the resurrection 27Some of the Sadducees came to him, people who deny that there is a resurrection.
 28They asked him, “Teacher, Moses wrote to us that if a man dies having a wife and without a child, his brother should take the wife and raise up a posterity for his brother.
 29There were therefore seven brothers: the first took a wife and died childless.
 30The second took her as wife,a and he [also] died childless.
 31The third took her, and likewise all seven [brothers] left no children and died.
 32Afterwards, the woman also died.
 33Therefore, in the resurrection, whose wife will she be? For the seven had her as wife.
” 34Jesus replied to them, “The children of this age get married and are given in marriage.
 35But those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and to the resurrection from the dead do not marry or are given in marriage.
 36They cannot die any more, because they are like the angels, and they are children of God, being children of the resurrection.
 37But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the [story of the burning] bush, when he called the Lord ‘The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
’b 38Now, he is not the God of the dead, but of the living, because all are alive to him!” 39Some of the scribes answered, “Teacher, you speak well!” 40Then, they did not dare to ask him any more questions.
 About David’s son 41Jesus 42David asked them, “Why do they say that the Christ is David’s son? himself says in the book of Psalms, ‘The Lordc said to my Lord,d Sit at my right hand, 43 until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet.
’e 44David therefore calls him Lord, so how is he his son?” 45While all the people were listening, Jesusf said to his disciples, 46“Beware of the scribes who like to walk in long robes and who love greetings in the marketplaces, the best seats in the synagogues, and the best places at a CT omits the second part of this verse and continues with verse 31 Exodus 3:6 c Hebrew “YHWH” d Hebrew “Adonai” e Psalms 110:1 / 109 LXX f Greek “he” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ feasts.
 47Theya devour the houses of widows and for a pretense say long prayers: they will receive greater condemnation!” 21 The gift of the poor widow Looking up, Jesus saw the rich who were putting their gifts into the treasury.
 2Then, he saw a certain poor widow casting in two small brass coins.
b 3He said, “Amen, I tell you that this poor widow has put in more than all of them! 4For all these [people] put in gifts for God from their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, put in all that she had to live on.
” Destruction of the temple foretold – The signs of the end 5As some were talking about the temple and how it was adorned with beautiful stonework and votive offerings, Jesusc said, 6“As for these things which you see, the days will come when not one stone will be left here [standing] on another and that will not be thrown down!” 7Then, they asked him, “Teacher, so when will these things take place? What is the sign that these things are about to happen?” 8Jesus replied, “Watch out that you do not get led astray, for many will come in my Name, saying: ‘I am hed,’ and, ‘The time is at hand!’ Do not follow them! 9When you hear of wars and insurrections,e do not be terrified, for these things must happen first, but the end will not come right away.
” 10Then he said to them, “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
 11There will be great earthquakes, famines, and plagues in various places.
 There will be fearful eventsf and great signs from heaven.
 Coming persecutions 12But before all these things [happen], you will be placed under arrest and be persecuted, you will be handed over to synagogues and prisons, brought before kings and governors for my Name’s sake.
 13It will turn out for you as an occasion to bear witness.
 14Therefore, settle it in your hearts not to ponder in advance how to answer, 15for I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries will not be able to withstand or contradict.
 16You will be handed over even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends.
 a Some of you will be put to death.
a 17You will be hated by all for my Name’s sake, 18yet not a hair of your head will perish.
 19By your endurance you will acquire your lives.
 The fall of Jerusalem foretold – The time of the Gentiles 20But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation is at hand.
 21Then, let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains! Let those who are in the midst of her depart! Let those who are in the countryside not enter in [the city].
 22For these are days of vengeance,b so that all things which are written may be fulfilled.
 23Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who nurse infants in those days! For there will be great distress in the land, and wrath to this people.
 24They will fall by the edge of the sword and will be taken away as captives into all the nations.
 Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
 The coming of the Son of Man 25There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars; and on the earth, the anxiety of nations, perplexed over the roaring of the sea and the waves.
 26People will faint from fear, apprehensive what is coming upon the world, as the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
 27Then, they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
 28But when these things begin to happen, look up and lift up your heads, because your redemptionc is near.
” Learning from the fig tree – A call to be watchful 29Then he told them a parable: “Look at the fig tree and all the trees.
 they are already budding, you see it and know on your own that the summer is already near.
 31Likewise, when you see these things happening, understand that the Kingdom of God is near.
 32Amen, I tell you: this generation will not pass away until all [these] things are accomplished.
 33Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
 30When 34And so, be on guard, for fear that your hearts may be weighed down with entertaining distractions, overdrinking, and the worries of this life, and that day will come upon you unexpectedly.
 35For it will come like a snare on all those who dwell on the face of the whole earth.
 36Therefore, be watchful all the time, praying that you may be counted worthy to escape all these things that will happen, and to stand before the Son of Man.
” a Acts 12:1-2 Or “retribution” c Or “deliverance / liberation” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 37Every day, Jesus was teaching in the temple, and every evening, he would go out and spend the night on the mountain that is called Olivet.
 38Then early in the morning, all the people came to him in the temple in order to listen to him.
 22 The plot against Jesus Now, the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the Passover, was approaching.
 2The chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to do away with Jesusa by killing him,b but they feared the people.
 3Then Satan entered into Judas, called Iscariot, who was numbered with the Twelve.
 4So Judas went and talked with the chief priests and officers of the guard about how he might deliver him to them.
 5They rejoiced and agreed to give him money.
 6Judas agreed and began to look for an opportunity to deliver him to them when there would be no crowd.
 Preparations for the Passover – The Lord’s Supper or Eucharist 7Then, the day of unleavened bread came, on which the Passover must be sacrificed.
 8So Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat [the Passover meal].
” 9They asked him, “Where do you want us to make preparations?” 10Jesus replied, “Behold, when you have entered into the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you.
 Follow him into the house which he enters.
 11Then tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’ 12He will show you a large, furnished upper room.
 Make preparations there.
” 13They went, found things as Jesus had told them, and made preparations for the Passover.
 14When the hour had come, he sat down with the Twelve apostles.
 15He said to them, “With fervent desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer, 16for I tell you, I will not eatc of it until it is fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.
” 17Then, taking a cup and having given thanks, he said, “Take this, and share it among you, 18for I tell you, I shall never again drink from the fruit of the vine until the Kingdom of God comes.
” a Greek “him” Greek “to death” c Some translations translate as “no longer” which seems to suggest that the Last Supper was a Passover / Seder meal, which is disputed.
 b 24An argument also arose between them about which one of them was considered to be the greatest.
 25Jesus said to them, “The kings of the nations have lordship over the people, and those who have authority over peopled are called ‘benefactors.
’ 26But not so with you! Instead, the one who is the greater among you should become as the younger, and the one who is leading as the one who serves.
 27Indeed, who is greater, the one reclining at the table, or the one who serves? Is it not the one at the table? Yet, I am among you as one who serves.
 28But you are those who have remained with me in my trials, 29and now I bestow a kingdom upon you, just as my Father bestowed [a kingdom] upon me, 30so that you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom; and you will sit on thrones, judging the Twelve tribes of Israel.
” 31And the Lord said,e “Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has asked to have you,f so that he might sift youg [all] like wheat! 32But I have prayed for you,h that your faith would not fail.
 And you, when you have turned back, strengthen your brethren.
” 33But Simon said, “Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death!” 34At this Jesus replied, “I tell you, Peter, by the time the rooster crows today, you will deny three times that you know me!” a The Greek word a;rton always refers to a leavened loaf in the New Testament.
 This seems to indicate that the Last Supper was not the Passover meal (see John 18:28).
 b Codex Bezae (D) and the old Latin omit the rest of the verse after “this is my body” c The Greek word avna,mnhsin often conveys the idea of memorial sacrifice and invocation in the Septuagint.
 d Greek “them” e CT omits “And the Lord said” f Singular g Plural, a reference to the Twelve h Singular ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 35Then Jesus asked them, “When I sent you out without purse, bag, or sandals, did you lack anything?” They replied, “Nothing.
” 36He then said to them, “But now, whoever has a purse should take it, and likewise a bag! Whoever has no sword should sell his cloak and buy one! 37For I tell you that what is written must still be fulfilled in me: ‘He was counted with transgressors.
’a Indeed, the things [written] concerning me are [reaching] a completion.
” 38So the disciples exclaimed, “Lord, behold, here are two swords!” but he told them, “That is enough!” The agony in the garden 39Jesus came out, and went, as his custom was, to the Mount of Olives.
 His disciples also followed him.
 40Having arrived at the place, he said to them, “Pray that you do not enter into temptation!” 41He then withdrew from them about a stone’s throw [away], knelt down and prayed, 42saying, “Father, if you are willing, take this cup away from me.
 Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done.
” 43And an angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
 44Being in agony, he prayed [even] more intensely, and his sweat became like great drops of blood falling down on the ground.
b 45When he rose up from his prayer, he came to the disciples and found them sleeping because of sheer grief.
 46He said to them, “Why do you sleep? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation!” The Lord’s betrayal and arrest in the garden 47While he was still speaking, behold, a multitude [came], and he who was called Judas, one of the Twelve, was leading them.
 He came near to Jesus to kiss him, 48but Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?” 49When those who were around him saw what was about to happen, they said to him, “Lord, shall we strike with the sword?” 50And one of them struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
 51But Jesus said, “Let me at least do this”c — and he touched the servant’s ear, and healed him.
 52Then Jesus said to the chief priests, captains of the temple, and presbyters who had come against him, “Have you come out as a Isaias (Isaiah) 53:12 CT considers 43 and 44 as an interpolation and places this section in double brackets.
 c Or possibly “No more of this!” (literally: “Suffer ye thus far” in YLT) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 212 against someone leading a rebellion, with swords and clubs? 53When I was with you in the temple every day, you did not stretch out your hands against me! But this is your hour, and the power of the darkness.
” Peter’s threefold denial 54They arrested him and led him away, and brought him into the high priest’s house.
 But Peter followed from a distance.
 55When peoplea had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter also sat among them.
 56A certain servant girl saw him as he sat in the light, and looking intently at him, she exclaimed, “This man also was with him!” 57However, Peterb denied Jesus,c saying, “Woman, I do not know him!” 58A little while later, someone else saw him, and said, “You also are one of them!” But Peter answered, “Sir,d I am not!” 59After about one hour had passed, another insisted, saying, “Truly, this man also was with him, for he is a Galilean!” 60But Peter said, “Sir, I do not know what you are talking about!” And immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
 61Then the Lord turned, and looked at Peter, and Peter remembered the Lord’s word, how he had said to him, “Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.
” 62So Peter went out and wept bitterly.
 63Now, the men who held Jesus [in custody] were mocking him and beating him.
 64Having blindfolded him, they struck him on the facee and asked him, “Prophesy! Who is the one who struck you?” 65They said many other insulting things to him.
 Before the Sanhedrin 66As soon as it was day, the assembly of the presbyters of the people was gathered, both chief priests and scribes.
 They brought Jesusf into their council, saying: 67“If you are the Christ,g tell us.
” But Jesus said to them, “If I tell you, you will not believe, 68and if I question [you], you will not answer me or arelease me.
 69But from now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the Power of God.
” a Greek “they” Greek “he” c Greek “him” d Or “man, friend” e CT omits “they struck him on the face” f Greek “him” g Or “Messiah,” “Anointed one” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 70They all asked, “Are you then the Son of God?” He said to them, “You say it because I am.
” 71Then they exclaimed, “Why do we need any more witnesses? We ourselves have heard [it] from his own mouth!” 23 Before Pilate – Before Herod Their whole group arose and brought Jesus before Pilate.
 2They began to bring charges against him, saying, “We have found this man perverting the nation, forbidding to pay taxes to Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ, a king.
” 3So Pilate questioned him, saying, “Are you the King of the Jews?” Jesus replied, “You say it.
” 4Pilate said to the chief priests and to the crowd, “I find no basis for a charge against this man.
” 5Still, they insisted, saying, “He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee [and] even to this place.
” 6But when Pilate heard Galilee mentioned, he asked if the man was a Galilean.
 7When he found out that Jesus was from Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem during those days.
 8Now, when Herod saw Jesus, he was extremely glad because he had desired to see him for a long time as he had heard many things about him, and he hoped to see some miracle done by him.
 9He questioned Jesus with many words, but Jesus gave no reply.
 10[Meanwhile], the chief priests and the scribes stood by, vehemently accusing him.
 11Then Herod and his soldiers humiliated and mocked Jesus.
b Dressing him in a luxurious robe, they sent him back to Pilate.
 12And Herod and Pilate became friends that very day, [although] before this, they had been enemies.
 Pilate condemns the Lord to be crucified 13Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers and the people.
 14He said to them, “You brought this man to me as someone who perverts the people, and behold, I did not find this man guilty of any of your charges against him.
 15Neither has Herod, for he has sent him back.
 As you can see, this man has done nothing worthy of death! 16Therefore, I will punish him and [then] release him.
” a b CT omits “or release me” Greek “him” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 214 17Now, Pilate had to release one prisoner to them at the feast.
a 18But they all cried out together, saying, “Away with this man! Release Barabbas to us!”19This one had been thrown into prison for a certain rebellionb in the city, and for murder.
 20Then Pilate addressed them once more, desiring to release Jesus.
 they shouted, saying, “Crucify! Crucify him!” 21But 22For the third time, Pilate said to them, “Why? What evil has this man done? I have found no reason for death in him.
 I will therefore chastise him and release him.
” 23But they were insistent with loud voices, demanding that Jesusc be crucified.
 And their shouts and the shouts of the chief priests prevailed.
 24So Pilate decreed that what they were asking for should be done.
 25He released the man who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, as the people had requested.
 But Jesus, he delivered up to their will.
 Simon of Cyrene – The way of the cross 26As the soldiers were leading Jesus away, they seized Simon, a Cyrenian [who was] coming from the countryside.
 They laid the cross on him, to carry it after Jesus.
 27A great multitude of the people followed him, including women who also mourned and lamented him.
 28But Jesus, turning to them, said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me! Instead, weep for yourselves and for your children! 29For behold, the days are coming in which people will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that never nursed.
’ 30Then, people will begin to tell the mountains, ‘Fall on us!’ and to tell the hills, ‘Cover us.
’d 31For if they do these things when the wood is green, what will be done when it is dry?” 32There the left.
 a CT omits verse 17 which may be an ancient marginal annotation.
 It is present in many manuscripts (א W Δ, Θ, Ψ, ƒ1, ƒ13, Byzantine; in D it is placed after 23:19) but missing in some very important authorities (Ƿ75, A, B, L).
 b Or “uprising” c Greek “he” d Hosea 10:8 e Greek Krani,on f Greek “they” ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ 34Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.
”a Dividing his garments among them, the soldiersb [began to] cast lots.
 35The people stood by, watching, and with them the rulers also scoffed at him, saying, “He saved others! Let him save himself, if this is the anointed onec of God, the chosen one!” 36The 37and 40But the other spoke up and rebuked him, saying, “Do you not even fear God, since you are under the same condemnation? 41We indeed [are punished] justly, because we are receiving the due reward for our deeds, but this man has done nothing wrong.
” 42He then said to Jesus, “Lord,e remember me when you come inf your Kingdom.
” 43And Jesus said to him, “Amen I tell you: today, you will be with me in Paradise.
”g The Lord’s death and burial 44It was now about the sixth hour,h and darkness came over the whole landi until the ninth hour.
j 45The sun was darkened, and the veil of the sanctuary was torn in two.
 46Crying with a loud voice, Jesus said, “Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!” Having said this, he breathed his last.
 47When the centurion saw what had taken place, he glorified God, saying, “Certainly, this was a righteous man.
” 48When all the multitudes that had come together to see this saw what had happened, they returned home now, there was a man named Joseph, who was a member of the council, a good and righteous man 51(who had not consented to their counsel and deed).
 He was from Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, and he was also waiting for the Kingdom of God.
 52This man went to Pilate and asked for Jesus’ body.
 53He took it down, wrapped it in a linen shroud and laid him in a tomb that was cut in stone, where no one had ever been laid.
 54It was the [day of the] Preparation,b and the Sabbath was drawing near.
 55The women who had come with Jesusc out of Galilee followed [Joseph] and saw the tomb, and how his body was laid.
 56They returned [home], and prepared spices and ointments.
 On the Sabbath, they rested according to the commandment.
 24 The Lord’s resurrection On the first day of the week,d at early dawn, they and some others came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared.
 2But they found the stone rolled away from the tomb.
 3So they entered in and did not find the bodye of the Lord Jesus.
 4And it happened, as they were greatly perplexed about this, that behold, two men stood by them in shining garments.
 5Terrified, the women bowed their faces to the ground.
 The two menf said to them, “Why do you seek the living among the dead? 6He is not here, but he is risen!g Remember what he told you when he was still in Galilee, 7saying that the Son of Man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, be crucified, and [on] the third day rise again?” 8Then, they remembered Jesus’h words.
 9Returning from the tomb, they told all these things to the eleven, and to all the others.
 10Now, they were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James.
i The other women with them told these things to the apostles.
 11But these words a Greek “him” Greek paraskeuh/j c Greek “him” d Literally “on the first of the sabbaths” (day is often implied in Greek) e Codex Bezae (D) and some old Latin manuscripts omit “of the Lord Jesus” f Greek “they” g Codex Bezae (D) and some old Latin manuscripts omit “He is not here, but he is risen!” h Greek “his” i This James could be James of Jerusalem, James of Alphaeus (one of the Twelve) or another James.
 See Appendix E.
 b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ seemed to be nonsense to them, and they did not believe them.
 12However, Peter got up and ran to the tomb.
 Stooping and looking in, he saw the strips of linen lying by themselves.
 He returned to his home, wondering what had taken place.
a Appearance on the road to Emmaus 13It then happened that two of the disciples were going that very day to a village named Emmaus, which was sixty stadiab from Jerusalem.
 14They were talking with each other about all of these things which had taken place.
 15And as they were talking together and discussing this, Jesus himself came near and went along with them.
 16However, their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
 17He asked them, “What are you talking about as you walk?” And they stopped walking, looking sad.
 18One of them, named Cleopas, answered him, “Are you the only strangerc in Jerusalem who does not know what has happened there in these days?” 19“What things?” he asked to them.
 They replied, “The things concerning Jesus, the Nazarene! He was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people; 20and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death, and had him crucified.
 21But we were hoping that he was the one who would redeem Israel.
 Yes, and besides all this, it is now the third day since these things have taken place.
 22Also, certain women of our company have puzzledd us: having arrived early at the tomb, 23they did not find his body.
 And they came back saying that they had also seen a vision of angels who said that he was alive! 24Some of us went to the tomb, and found it just as the women had said, but they did not see him.
” 25He said to them, “You foolish men! So slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken! 26Did not the Christ have to suffer these things and enter into his glory?” 27And beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he explained to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.
 28As they were approaching the village where they were going, he acted like he would continue on his way.
 29“Stay with us!” they urged him, saying, “It is almost evening, and the day is almost over!” So he went in to stay with them.
 30Now, it happened that when he had sat down at the table with them, he took the bread and gave thanks.
 Breaking a Codex Bezae (D) and some old Latin manuscripts omit this verse.
 60 stadia = about 11 kilometers or about 7 miles.
 c Or “foreigner” d Or “amazed” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 218 it, he gave it to them.
 31And their eyes were opened; they knewa him, and he vanished out of their sight.
 32Then they said one to another, “Were not our hearts burning within us while he spoke to us along the way, and while he opened the Scriptures to us?” 33They rose up that very hour, returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together and [also] those who were with them.
 34They were saying, “The Lord is risen indeed, and he has appeared to Simon!” 35Then, the two related what had happened along the way, and how they had recognized him in the breaking of the bread.
 Appearance to the disciples 36As they were saying these things, Jesus himself stood among themb and said to them, “Peace be to you!” Scriptures.
 46He said to them, “This is what is written, that it was necessary for the Christf to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day, 47and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name to all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
 48You are witnesses of these things! 49Behold, I send forth the promiseg of my Father on you.
 But wait in the city of Jerusalem until you are clothed with power from on high.
” a Or “recognized” Codex Bezae (D) and various old Latin witnesses omit “and said to them, ‘Peace be to you’” c Codex Bezae (D), as well as the Curetonian and Sinaitic Syriac versions, omit this verse.
 d CT omits “and a honeycomb from a beehive” e Notice the broad tripartite definition of the Old Testament f Or “Messiah” g Or “pledge” b ACCORDING TO LUKE - ΚΑΤΑ ΛΟΥΚΑΝ The Ascension 50He led them out as far as Bethany, lifted up his hands, and blessed them.
 happened, while he was blessing them, that he withdrewa from themb and was carried up into heaven.
c 52They expressed adoration tod him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy; 53and they were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God.
 Amen.
e 51It a Or “departed”  *אand Codex Bezae (D), along with the Sinaitic Syriac and many old Latin manuscripts, omit the rest of the verse.
 c Or “the sky” d proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) e CT omits “Amen” and “praising and” in the same verse b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 220 INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF JOHN AUTHORSHIP AND DATE The gospel itself is anonymous but the author is identified as “the disciple whom Jesus loved” (21:20).
 In spite of modern speculations to the effect that this “disciple” may have been Lazarus (11:3,36), an entire community or someone else, the consistent and reliable tradition of the early Fathers is that John of Zebedee was in fact the apostolic origin of the Gospel which now bears his name.
 There are indications that the author may have been a (Jewish) priest,a a view which is not incompatible with John’s occupation as a fisherman and which harmonizes well with the focus of the Gospel (Jerusalem, Feasts, Temple).
 In the late second century, St.
 Polycrates of Ephesus evoked the not-so-distant memory of the Apostle John with these words: There is also John, who leaned on the Lord’s breast who was a priest wearing the petalon (high-priestly miter or crown), a witness and a teacher, and he sleeps at Ephesus.
b Early Christians (including Theophilus of Antioch, Irenaeus of Lyons and Clement of Alexandria) have handed down a consistent tradition indicating that John would have written his gospel in Ephesus, around the year 96.
c Based on internal evidence (such as 5:2 “there is in Jerusalem”), some scholars also deem it possible that the fourth gospel was written before the year 70 AD and completed (or published, or released to other Churches) at a later time.
 As we shall see in our mention of the parallelism between Jacob/Israel and Jesus, as well as the successive theme of Joseph (of Genesis) and the Beloved Disciple, there seems to be an intentional focus on a symbolic and anonymous authorship.
 This is of course consistent with the unnamed authorship of the other gospels and serves to draw the reader’s attention on the one who is seen in glory (Jesus) as opposed to the one who bears witness.
 On the basic of linguistic data, a few scholars haved suggested that the fourth gospel may have been originally written in Aramaic/Hebrew or a See Introduction to Revelation Eusebius – Ecclesiastical History, 3.
31.
2-51 c See also Introduction to Revelation for further discussion of the dating issue b INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF JOHN directly in Greek but with an Aramaic/Hebrew mind.
 However, we shall also note important similarities between the Gospel of John and Jewish Hellenistic themes, notably those of Philo of Alexandria (20 BC – circa 50 AD).
a THEME(S) The High Priestly Gospel This gospel can be called “the High Priestly” Gospel, not only because of the famous prayer known by that name found in chapter 17, but also because this theme and approach runs throughout this unique gospel.
 St.
 John reveals the truth about Christ by “drawing aside the curtain”b on the person (hypostasis) of the Great High Priest who is the pre-eternal Word (logosc) of God.
 It is for this reason that the early Churches considered this gospel as reserved for those who are initiated or about to be initiated in the Holy Mysteries: to this day (in Orthodox practice,) it is only read during and after the baptismal season of Holy Pascha.
 This is consistent with the theme of mystery, initiation and intimate knowledge which is recurrent in the fourth gospel.
d The manifestation in this world of the High Priest consecrated as the Holy One of God is the fulfillment of God’s revelation: the invisible Most High God is made manifest and “explained” or “exegeted” (1:18) by his very Word who shares his divine and uncreated nature.
 Thus, the God who had no visible form on Mount Sinai (Deut.
 4:12,15) is now seen with human eyes: “we have seen his glory” (1:12;12:41).
 From the eternal and timeless holy of holies,e one’s perspective is quite different.
 One comes to Christ if drawn by the Father by whom we are “fully known” or ‘foreknown’ (1 Cor.
 13:12).
 Hence, such passages as John 6:37-44 or 10:36 can only be rightly understood by those who live in the Church and who have experienced the fulfilled eschatology of the Kingdom in the Divine Liturgy (see Introduction to Revelation).
 Jesus Christ “He had a dream in which he saw a stairway resting on the earth, with its top reaching to heaven, and the angels of God were ascending and descending on it.
” (Gen.
 28:12) “[Jesus] saith to [Nathaniel]: Amen, amen, I say to you, you shall see the heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.
” (John 1:51) INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF JOHN Jacob - Israel Jesus Christ Jacob and the well (Genesis 29).
 Note that wisdom is associated with water in many passages, e.
g.
 Prov.
 18:4; Sirach 15:1-3a; 24:21-34b “[Jesus] came to a town in Samaria called Sychar, near the plot of ground Jacob had given to his son Joseph… [The woman at the well asked:] Are you greater than our father Jacob?” (John 4:5,12) Wisdom gives Jacob signs on the journey (Wisd.
 10:9-12).
 The ‘signs’ (shmei/a) or divine acts on the Lord’s journey to Jerusalem “I, [Jacob] may return to my father’s house in peace” (Gen.
 28:20) “In my Father's house there are many mansions.
” (John 14:2) “Do not make my Father’s house a marketplace!” (John 2:16) “[Jacob] was afraid, and said: “how fearful is this place! this is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven” (Gen.
 28:17) “I am the gate; if any one enters by me, he will be saved, and will go in and out and find pasture.
” (John 10:9) “Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel,c because you have struggled with God and with men and have overcome… So Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, saying, "For I have seen God face to face, and yet my life is preserved.
” (Gen.
 32:28-30) a “The man who fears the Lord will do this, and he who holds to the law will obtain wisdom.
 She will come to meet him like a mother, and like the wife of his youth she will welcome him.
 She will feed him with the bread of understanding, and give him the water of wisdom to drink.
” b “Those who eat me will hunger for more, and those who drink me will thirst for more.
” Compare with the dialogue in John 4.
 c The view of Hellenistic Jews and of the Early Christians was that Israel meant “a human being who sees / has seen God” – see Traditions of the Bible by James Kugel THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 224 the fullness of truth, intimacy and of the Holy Spirit manifested by the beloved disciple.
 Sonship is expressed by the “closeness to the bosom,”a as is the privilege of that disciple: One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was lying close to the breast of Jesus.
 24 So Simon Peter beckoned to him and said, “Tell us who it is of whom he speaks.
” 25 So lying thus, close to the breast of Jesus, he said to him, "Lord, who is it?” Hence, even Peter, the Rock who may perhaps be compared to Judahb must ask this ‘Joseph-like’ disciple to obtain the great secret of the Lord’s betrayal.
 It is this same disciple who first believed that Jesus had risen from the dead (20:4-8) and who recognized the risen Lord on the lake side (21:7).
 As Joseph Grassi suggests: “the gospel descriptions envisage a father-son relationship modeled on that between Jesus and his own Father… Putting it all together, we would have the succession: God the Father – beloved son Jesus – beloved disciple and son.
”c This is also a way to understand the entrusting of Mary to the disciple and of the disciple to the Lord’s mother.
 The sonship relationship is thus continued and the mother of the Lord is again the icon of Wisdom, as in Revelation 12.
 Genesis and Creation recapitulated As in Revelation, the patterns of the Old Testament are continued and fulfilled: John 1 is symmetrical to Genesis 1 and culminates in the Lord’s baptism which marks the beginning of the New Creation: Old Creation - Temporal New Creation - Eternal “In the beginning”d (Gen.
 1:1) “In the beginning” (John 1:1) “The Spirit of God moved over the water” (Gen.
 1:1) “I have seen the Spirit coming down, as a dove, out of heaven, and it remained on him” (John 1:32) “And God said…” (Gen.
 1:3) “a voice came from heaven which said” (Luke 3:22) a This theme starts with 1:18: “The unique Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has explained him” b In the words of Joseph Grassi, “the holder of external authority.
” Grassi is the author of the remarkable Secret Identity of the Beloved Disciple which provided important information for this section.
 See Appendix B.
 c Ibid.
, p.
 52 d Greek evn avrch/| in LXX as in John 1:1 INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF JOHN Old Creation - Temporal New Creation - Eternal “Let there be light, and there was light” (Gen.
 1:3) “that was the true Light which gives light to everyone coming into the world” + Luke 3:20-23 and notes “God separated the light from the darkness” (Gen.
 1:4) “everyone practicing evil hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his deeds should be exposed” (John 3:19) Day One (Gen.
 1:5) Day Onea and the Eighth Day Old Adam New Adamb (1 Co.
 15:22,45) Sabbath, seal of the old creation (Exodus 20:11) The Lord’s Day, seal of the new creation (2 Co.
 5:17; Gal.
 6:15) The gospel of John is in many ways ‘a different gospel.
’ Certain themes emphasized in the synoptics (parables, exorcisms, and parousia) are absent.
 Instead, the evangelist focuses on miracles (“signs”) not previously included and lengthy theological discourses.
 Many biblical scholars see a threefold structure in the book and a parallel between Jewish liturgical feasts and their fulfillment by the Lord of Glory:  The prologue about the Word  Book of Signs (Seven Signs)  Book of Glory, Last Teachings, Death and Resurrection.
 The Seven Signs Our presentation of the seven signsc does not include the Lord’s walk on the water and suggests that the last sign is in fact the piercing of his side, which results in this remarkable structure: a There are good reasons to believe that Jesus was baptized right at the end of Sabbath on the first day, just as he also rose from the dead on the first day (the Lord’s Day).
 b Jesus triumphs over the old serpent in the desert immediately after his baptism to be revealed as the New Adam, which is why “immediately the Spirit drove Him into the wilderness” (Mark 1:12).
 c Based on Grassi, p.
 68 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 226 The Wedding Feast at Cana (2:1-12) The raising of the dying son (4:56-54) The Sabbath healing at Bethseda (5:1-16) Multiplication of bread / Bread of Life (6:1-71) The Sabbath healing of the blind man (9:1-41) The raising of Lazarus (11:1-41) Blood and Water from the side (19:25-38) INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF JOHN Resurrection of Lazarus (Feast: Lazarus Saturday) Rome, Via Latina Catacomb, 4th century THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT The Hospitality of Abraham Andrei Rublev: Old Testament Trinity (c.
 1410 CE; originally at the Holy Trinity Cathedral at the St.
 Sergius Holy Trinity Monastery; presently held the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow) 228 INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF JOHN The Great High Priest Contemporary – Greek Style THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT Χριστός ανέστη εκ νεκρών, θανάτω θάνατον πατήσας, και τοις εν τοις μνήμασι ζωήν χαρισάμενος The Resurrection of our Lord, God and Savior Jesus Christ (Pascha) By the hand of Julia Hayes 230 ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ (ACCORDING TO) JOHN (ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ) 1 Prologue: The Logos / Word of God In the beginning was the Word,a and the Word was with God, and the Word was {what} Godb {was}.
 2This one was in the beginning with God.
 3All things came into being through him, and without him, nothing came into being that has come into being.
c 4In him was life, life that was the light of mankind.
 5The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcomed it.
 6There came a man, sent from God, whose name was John.
 7John came as a witness, to bear witness to the light, so that all might believe through him.
 8He was not the light, but [he was sent] to bear witness to the light.
 9The true light who enlightens everyone was coming into the world.
 10He was in the world, and the world had come into existence through him, and the world did not recognizee him.
 11He came to his own [people], and those who were his own did not receivef him.
 12But as many as received him, to them he gave the abilityg to become God’s children, to those who a The Greek word Logos (lo,goj) is traditionally translated as “Word.
” French translations sometimes use “Verb” which has a dynamic quality.
 The English “Message” or “Expression of the Mind” may also be appropriate attempts to convey the nuance of the Greek concept.
 The Jewish-Alexandrian theologian and philosopher Philo wrote extensively about the Logos in ways that are reminiscent of NT theology.
 For instance, his teaching that “For the Logos of the living God being the bond of every thing, as has been said before, holds all things together, and binds all the parts, and prevents them from being loosened or separated” echoes Colossians 1:17.
 b VEn avrch/| h=n o` lo,goj( kai.
 o` lo,goj h=n pro.
j to.
n qeo,n( kai.
 qeo.
j h=n o` lo,gojÅ This second theos could also be translated ‘divine’ as the construction indicates a qualitative sense for theos.
 The Word is not God in the sense that he is the same person as the theos mentioned in 1:1a; he is not God the Father (God absolutely as in common NT usage) or the Trinity.
 The point being made is that the Logos is of the same uncreated nature or essence as God the Father, with whom he eternally exists.
 This verse is echoed in the Nicene Creed: “God (qualitative or derivative) from God (personal, the Father), Light from Light, True God from True God… homoousion with the Father.
” c Compare Wisdom 9:1 d The word translated “overcome” (katelaben) can also be translated “comprehended.
” It may refer to getting a grip on an enemy to defeat him.
 e Or “know” ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ 26John answered them, “I baptize in water, but among you stands one whom you do not know.
a 27He is the one who comes after me, who is ranked before me,b whose sandal strap I am not worthy to untie.
” 28These things took place in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
 29The next day, Johnc saw Jesus coming to him and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world! 30This is the one of whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who is ranked before me, because he was before me.
’ 31I did not know him, but for this reason I came baptizing in water: so that he would be revealed to Israel.
” 32John bore witness, saying, “I saw the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven and remain on him.
 33I did not know him, but the one who sent me to baptize in water said to me, ‘Upon whom you will see the Spirit descending and remaining, this is he who baptizes in the Holy Spirit.
’ 34Moreover, I myself have seen and testified that this is the Son of God.
”d 35Again, the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples.
 36He looked at Jesus as he was walking by and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God!” 37The two disciples heard him speak, and they began to follow Jesus.
 38Turning and seeing them following, Jesus asked them, “What are you looking for?” They said to him, “Rabbi” (which translated means Teacher), “where are you staying?” First disciples 39Jesuse said to them, “Come, and see!” They came and saw where he was staying, and they remained with him that day.
 (It was about the tenth hour).
f 40One of the two who heard John and who began to follow Jesus was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother.
 41He first found his own brother, Simon and said to him, “We have found the Messiah!”g (which translated means Christ).
h 42Andrewi brought him to Jesus who looked at him, and said, “You are Simon the son of Jonah.
 You shall be called Kephas” (which translated means Peter).
 43On the next day, being determined to go out into Galilee, Jesusa met Philip and said to him, “Follow me!” 44Now, Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.
 45Philip found Nathaniel and said to him, “We have found the one of whom Moses in the law and the prophets, have written: Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph!” 46Nathanael asked him, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip replied, “Come and see!” 47As Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to him, he said about him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit!” 48Nathanael asked Jesus, “How do you know me?” Jesus answered him, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.
” 49Nathanael replied, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are King of Israel!” 50Jesus said to him, “Because I told you, ‘I saw you underneath the fig tree,’ do you believe? You will see greater things than these!” 51He said to Philip, “Amen, amen, I tell you; hereafter, youb will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending uponc the Son of Man.
” 2 The wedding at Cana – First sign: the water changed into wine The third day, there was a wedding in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there.
 2Jesus also was invited, with his disciples, to the wedding.
 3When the wine ran out, Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no wine.
” 4Jesus said to her, “Woman, what is that to you and me? My hour has not yet come.
” 5His mother said to the servants, “Whatever he tells you to do, do it.
” six water jars made of stone were set there, meant for the rites of purification of the Jews, and they each contained two or three measures.
d 7Jesus said to them, “Fill the jars with water!” So they filled them up to the brim.
 8He then said to them, “Now, draw some out, and take it to the chief steward of the feast;” and they did so.
 9When the chief steward of the feast 6Now, a Greek “he” This “you” is plural c Greek “upon, on, toward” – this may be an allusion to a Jewish understanding of Jacob’s vision of angels.
 Jesus is often presented as the new Jacob-Israel, as in Matthew’s (2:15) application of Hosea 11:1 MT.
 d 2 to 3 measures (metretes) is about 20 to 30 gallons, or 75 to 115 liters b ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ tasted the water now become wine (not knowing where it had come from, but the servants who had drawn the water knew), he called the bridegroom 10and said to him, “Everyone serves the good wine first, and after the guests have drunk freely, the inferior one.
 But you have kept the good wine until now!” 11This, the beginning of his signs,a Jesus performed in Cana of Galilee.
 He revealed his glory, and his disciples believedb in him.
 12After this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, his brothers,c and his disciples; and they did not stay there [more than] a few days.
 A cleansing of the temple 13Now, a The gospel of John uses the word “sign(s)” instead of “miracles” Or possibly “began to believe” c See Appendix E d Or “will devour me” - Psalms 69:9 / 68 LXX e See Matthew 26:61 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 236 3 Dialogue with Nicodemus – The new birth Now, there was one of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a leader of the Jews.
 2He came to Jesus by night, and said, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God because no one can performs the signs which you accomplish unless God is with him.
” 3Jesus answered him, “Amen, amen, I tell you; unless one is born anew,a he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
” 4Nicodemus asked him, “How can someone who is old be born? Can one enter a second time into his mother’s womb, and be born [anew]?” 5Jesus answered, “Amen, amen, I tell you; unless one is born of water and spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God! 6What is born of the flesh is flesh.
 What is born of the Spiritb is spirit.
 7Do not marvel that I said to you, ‘You must be born anew.
’ 8The windc blows where it wants to, and you hear its sound, but do not know where it comes from and where it is going.
 So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.
” 9Nicodemus said, “How can this be?” 10Jesus replied and said, “You are the teacher of Israel and do not understand these things? 11Amen, amen, I tell you; we speak of what we know, and [we] bear witness to what we have seen, and you do not receive our testimony.
 12If I told you earthly things and you do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you [about] heavenly things? 13No one has ascended into heaven, except for the one who came down out of heaven, the Son of Man who is in heaven.
d 14And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, likewise, the Son of Man must be lifted up, 15so that everyone believing in him should not perish bute have eternal life.
 16Indeed, God so loved the world that he gave his only-begottenf Son, so that everyone who believesg in him should not perish but have eternal life.
 17Certainly, God did not send his Son into the world to judge the world, but so that the world should be savedh through him.
 18Anyone who believes in him is not judged, a The word translated “anew” (a;nwqen) (anothen) here and in John 3:7 also means “again,” “from above” or even “from the very first.
” b Or “spirit” c The same Greek word (pneu,matoj)(pneuma) means wind, breath, and spirit.
 d CT omits “who is in heaven” based on the Alexandrian tradition.
 However, the longer ending “who is in heaven” was know to many ancient writers, including Hippolytus, Origen, Dionysius, Hilary, Jerome, Augustine).
 Origen and Jerome also mention the shorter form.
 e CT omits “not perish but” f Or “one and only / unique / uniquely loved” g Literally “the one believing in him” h The Greek swqh/ also conveys the idea of “to deliver / rescue / heal / make well” ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ but whoever does not believe has already been judged, because such a person has not believed in the Name of the only-begottena Son of God.
 19This is the judgment: that the light has come into the world, and people have loved the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds were evil.
 20For everyone who practices evil hates the light and does not come to the light, for fear that his works would be exposed.
 21But whoever practices the truth comes to the light, so that his works may be revealed as done in God.
” John the Baptist bears witness again – ‘The friend of the bridegroom’ 22After these things, Jesus came with his disciples into the land of Judea.
 He stayed there with them, and baptized.
 23John also was baptizing at Enon near Salim, because there was much water there, and peopleb came, and [they] were baptized.
 24(For John had not yet been thrown into prison).
 25Now, a discussionc arose on the part of John’s disciples with some Jewsd about ceremonial washing.
e 26They came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, he who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you bore witness, behold, this one is [now] baptizing, and everyone is coming to him!” 27John answered, “No one can receive anything unless it has been given him from heaven.
 28You yourselves testify that I said, ‘I am not the Christ,’ but, ‘I have been sent before him.
’ 29He who has the bride is the bridegroom, but the friend of the bridegroom who stands [by] and hears him rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice.
 And so my joy is fulfilled.
 30He must increase, but I must decrease.
” The one who comes from abovef 31He who comes from above is above all.
 He who is from the earth belongs to the earth, and he speaks from the earth.
 He who comes from heaven is above all.
 32What he has seen and heard is what he bears witness to, but no one acceptsg his testimony.
 33He who has accepted his testimony has set his seal [to this], that God is true.
 34Indeed the one whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives the Spirit without measure.
 35The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand.
 36The one who Then, when the Lordb learned that the Pharisees had heard, “Jesus is making and baptizing more disciples than John” 2(although Jesus himself did not baptize, but his disciples), 3he left Judea and departed into Galilee.
 4Now, he needed to pass through Samaria.
 5And so, he arrived at a city of Samaria called Sychar, near the parcel of ground that Jacob had given to his son Joseph; 6and Jacob’s well was there.
 Jesus, tired from his journey, sat down by the well.
 It was about the sixth hour.
c 7A woman of Samaria came to draw water.
 Jesus said to her, “Give me [something] to drink.
” 8(For his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food).
 9The Samaritan woman then said to him, “How is it that you, being a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.
)d 10Jesus answered her, “If you knew the gift of God, and who it is who says to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water!” 11The woman replied, “Sir,e you have nothing to draw [water] with, and the well is deep! Where then do you get that living water? 12Are you greater than our father Jacob who gave us the well and drank of it himself, as did his children and his livestock?” 13Jesus replied, “Everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty again! whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again.
 Not only this, the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life.
” 14But 15The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water, so that I may never be thirsty or come all the way here to draw [water]!” 16Jesus 17The a said to her, “Go, call your husband, and come here.
” woman answered, “I have no husband.
” Or “disobeys” CT reads “Jesus” c Noon d This part of the verse is omitted in *א, D, and several old Latin manuscripts.
 e Greek ku,rie (can also mean “Lord”) b ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ Jesus replied, “You said well, ‘I have no husband,’ 18for you have had five husbands, and the one whom you now have is not your husband.
 This you have said truthfully.
” 19The woman said to him, “Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet! 20Our ancestors expressed adorationa on this mountain,b and you Jews say that Jerusalem is the place where people should express adoration.
” 21Jesus said to her, “Woman, believe me, a timec is coming when neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you express adoration to the Father.
 22You express adoration to what you do not know.
 We express adoration to what we know, for salvation is from the Jews.
 23But the hourd is coming, and now is, when the true worshipers will express adoration to the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father is seeking such [people] to express adoration to him.
 24God is a spirit,e and those who express adoration to him must express adoration in spirit and truth.
” 25The woman said to him, “I know that Messiahf is coming, (he who is called Christ).
 When he comes, he will proclaim all things to us.
” 26Jesus replied, “I am he, the one who is speaking to you.
” 27Just then, his disciples arrived.
 They were astonished that he was speaking with a woman, yet no one said, “What are you looking for?” or, “Why do you speak with her?” 28Then, the woman left her water jar, went away into the city, and said to the people, 29“Come, see a man who told me everything I have done! Could this be the Christ?” 30The peopleg [then] went out of the city, and were coming to him.
 the disciples urged him, saying, “Rabbi, eat!” 31Meanwhile, 32But he told them, “I have food to eat that you do not know about.
” 33The disciples then said one to another, “Has anyone brought him something to eat?” 34Jesus said to them, “My food is to do the will of the one who sent me, and to accomplish his work.
 35Do you not say, ‘There are still four months until the harvest comes?’ Behold, I tell you, lift up your eyes and look at the fields! They are already white for the harvest! 36[Already], the one who a In John 4:19-14, proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo).
 b Mount Gerizim c Or “an hour / the hour” d Or “an hour / the hour” e Or “God is Spirit / spirit” f Greek Messi,aj g Greek “they” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 240 reaps is receiving his wages and gathering fruita to eternal life; so that both the one who sows and the one who reaps may rejoice together! 37For in this, the saying is true, ‘One sows, and another reaps.
’ 38I sent you to reap that for which you have not labored.
 Others have labored, and you have entered into [the rewards of] their labor.
” 39Many of the Samaritans from that city believed in him because of the word of the woman who had testified, “He told me everything that I did!” 40For this reason, when the Samaritans came to him, they begged him to stay with them.
 So, he stayed there two days, 41and many more believed because of his word.
 42Then they said to the woman, “Now we believe, not because of what you said, but because we have heard for ourselves and [we] knowb that this is indeed the Savior of the world, the Christ.
”c Return to Galilee – Healing of a child: a second sign in Cana 43After the two days, Jesusd departed from there and went into Galilee.
 Jesus himself had testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country).
 45When he arrived into Galilee, the Galileans welcomede him, having seen all that he had done in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast.
 46Therefore, Jesus returned to Cana of Galilee where he had turned the water into wine.
 Now, there was a certain royal official whose son was sick at Capernaum.
 47When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him and begged him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death.
 48Jesus then said to him, “Unless you see signs and wonders, you will never believe!” 44(For 49The nobleman replied, “Sir,f come down before my child dies.
” 50Jesus told him, “Go on your way.
 Your son lives.
” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him and he went on his way.
 51Even as he was on the way, his servants met him and told him the news: “Your child lives!” 52He asked them the hour when the boy had begun to get better.
 Then, they told him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour,g the fever left him!” 53And so, the father learnedh that it was at that [very] hour in which Jesus had said to him, “Your son lives.
” And he believed, along with his whole household.
 54This was the second sign that Jesus performed on his return from Judea into Galilee.
 a Or also “crop / outcome / gain” Or “perceive / recognize / acknowledge” c CT omits “the Christ” (following P66, P75, א, B) d Greek “he” e Or “received” f Greek ku,rie (can also mean “Lord”) g 1:00 pm h Or “knew / realized” b ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ 5 The healing at the pool on the Sabbath After these things, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
 2Now in Jerusalem, by the sheep gate, there is a pool with five porches called in Hebrew “Bethesda.
” 3Under these laid a great multitude of people who were sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed, waiting for the moving of the water.
a 4<For an angel went down at certain times into the pool, and stirred up the water.
 Then whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was made whole of whatever disease he had>.
 5A certain man was there, who had been sick for thirty-eight years.
 6When Jesus saw him lying there and perceivedb that the man had been sick for a long time, he asked him, “Do you want to be made well?” 7The sick man replied, “Sir,c I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I am coming, someone else steps down before me!” 8Jesus said to him, “Arise, take up your mat, and walk!” 9Immediately, walk.
 the man was made well; he took up his mat and began to Now, it was the Sabbath on that day.
 10And so, the Jews said to the man who had been cured, “It is the Sabbath! It is not lawful for you to carry the mat!” 11The man answered them, “He who made me well, that one said to me, ‘Take up your mat, and walk.
’” 12Then they asked him, “Who is the man who said to you, ‘Take up your mat, and walk?’” 13But the man who had been healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn in the crowd that was there.
 14Later, Jesus found him in the temple and said to him, “Behold, you have become well.
 Sin no more, so that nothing worse may happen to you!” The Jews begin to persecute Jesus 15The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
 16For this reason, the Jews persecuted Jesus <and sought to kill a CT omits “waiting for the moving of the water” as well as verse 4 Or “knew / learned / realized” c Greek ku,rie (can also mean “Lord”) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 242 him>a because he did these things on the Sabbath.
 17But Jesus answered them, “My Father is still working, and I am also working.
” 18Because of this, the Jews were seeking all the more to kill him, not only because he broke the Sabbath, but also because he called God his own Father,b making himself equal with God.
 The Father and the Son 19Accordingly, Jesus answered them, “Amen, amen, I tell you; the Son can do nothing of himself, but [only] what he sees the Father doing.
 Indeed, whatever the Fatherc does, the Son also does likewise.
 20For the Father has deep affectiond for the Son, and shows him all things that he himself does.
 And the Fathere will show him greater works than these, so that you may be astonished.
 21For [just] as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, likewise the Son also gives life to whom he desires.
 22As it is, the Father judges no one, but he has given all judgment to the Son, 23so that all may honor the Son even as they honor the Father.
 Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him! 24Amen, amen, I tell you; the one who hears my word and believes in him who sent me has eternal life and does not come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life.
 25Amen, amen, I tell you; the hour is coming and now is, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will come to life.
 26For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself.
 27He also gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is Son of Man.
f 28Do not be astonished at this, because the hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice 29and come out; those who have done good, to the resurrection of life; and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment.
 30I can do nothing of myself.
 As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is righteous because I do not seek my own will, but the will of my Father who sent me.
” Witnesses to Jesus – Belief and unbelief 31“If I bear witness about myself, my testimony is not valid.
 32There is another who bears witness to me, and I know that the testimony by which he bears witness about me is true.
 33You have sent [messengers] to John, and he has testified to the truth.
 34However, the testimony which I receive is not from man.
 However, I say these things so that you may be saved.
 a CT omits “and sought to kill him” Compare Wisdom 2:16 c Greek “he” d Or “loves” (Greek filei/) e Greek “he” f The Greek could be translated “a Son of Man” or “the Son of Man.
” b ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ 35Johna was the burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light.
 36But the testimony which I have is greater than that of John, because the works which the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I do, they bear witness about me, that the Father has sent me.
 37The Father himself, who sent me, he has testified about me.
 You have never heard his voice at any time, and you have never seen his outward appearance.
b 38You do not have his word living in you, because you do not believe the one whom he sent.
 39You search the Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is they that bear witness to me.
 40Yet, you will not come to me to have life.
 41I do not receive glory from men, 42but I know you, that you do not have God’s love in yourselves.
 43I have come in my Father’s Name, and you do not receive me.
 If another comes in his own name, you will receive him! 44How can you believe, since you receive glory from one another and do not seek the glory that comes from the only God?c 45Do not think that I will accuse you before the Father.
 The one who accuses you is in fact Moses, on whom you have set your hope.
 46For if you believed Moses, you would believe me because he wrote about me.
 47But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?” 6 The multiplication of the five loaves After these things, Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee (or [also called] of Tiberias).
 2A great multitude followed him, because they saw the signs he accomplished on those who were sick.
 3Jesus went up into the mountain and sat there with his disciples.
 4Now, the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was near.
 5When Jesus looked up and saw that a great crowd was coming to him, he asked Philip, “Where are we to buy bread, so that these [people] may eat?” 6But he said this to test Philip,d for he himself knew what he would do.
 7Philip answered him, “Two hundred denariie worth of bread is not sufficient for them, so that everyone might receive [even] a little!” 8One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him, 9“There is a boy here who has five barley loaves [of bread] and two fish, but what are these among so many?” a Greek “he” Greek ei=doj not morfh/| c Greek tou/ mo,nou qeou/ d Greek “he” e About 6 to 8 months of a laborer’s wages b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 244 10Jesus said, “Have the people sit down.
” Now, there was much grass in that place; and so the men sat down, about five thousand in number.
 11Then Jesus took the loaves, and having given thanks, he distributed [them] to the disciples, and the disciples to those who were sitting down; and [he did] likewise with the fish, as much as they desired.
 12When they were filled, he said to his disciples, “Gather up the broken pieces which are left over, so that nothing may be lost!”a 13And so, they gathered them up and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which were left over by those who had eaten.
 14When the people saw the sign which Jesus had accomplished, they said, “This is truly the prophet who comes into the world!” 15Jesus therefore, perceiving that they were about to come and take him by force in order to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain by himself.
 The walking on water 16When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea 17where they got into the boat and headed across the sea to Capernaum.
 It was now dark, and Jesus had not returned to them.
 18Because a great wind was blowing, the sea became rough.
 19After rowing about three or four miles,b the disciplesc saw Jesus walking on the sea and approaching the boat.
 And they were frightened, 20but Jesus said to them, “It is I!d Do not be afraid!” 21At this, they were willing to receive him into the boat, and immediately, the boat reached the shore where they were going.
 In the synagogue of Capernaum - The Bread of Life 22On the next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there, <except the one in which his disciples had embarked,> and that Jesus had not entered with his disciples into the boat, but that his disciples had gone away alone.
 23However, [a few] boats from Tiberias landed near the place where the people had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
 24And so, when the multitude noticed that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to Capernaum to seek Jesus.
 25When they found him on the other side of the sea, they asked him, “Rabbi, when did you arrive here?” 26Jesus answered them, “Amen, amen, I tell you; you seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves and were satisfied.
 27Do not work for the food which perishes, but for the food which remains to a Or “wasted” 25 to 30 stadia is about 5 to 6 kilometers or about 3 to 4 miles c Greek “they” d Or “I am” b ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you.
 For the Father has sealeda him – [even] God!” 28As a result, they asked him, “What must we do, that we may accomplish the works of God?” 29Jesus replied, “This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent!” 30So they said to him, “What then do you do for a sign, so that we may see and believe you? What work do you accomplish? 31Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness! As it is written, ‘He gave them bread out of heavenb to eat.
’”c 32Jesus therefore said to them, “Amen, amen, I tell you; it was not Moses who gave you the bread out of heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven.
 33For the bread of God is what comes down out of heaven, and [it] gives life to the world.
” 34Then Isaias (Isaiah) 54:13 CT omits “in me” c Or “fathers” d Or “If anyone eats of this bread, this one will live forever!” e The Greek me,nei is also translated “abide(s)” f The Greek trw,gwn means “eat, chew.
” It is sometimes loosely translated “feed on.
” g Or “an offensive saying” b ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ 66At this, many of his disciples lefta and no longer walked with him.
 67Then Jesus said to the Twelve, “Do you also want to leave?” 68Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life! 69We have come to believe and know that you are the Christ, the Son of the living God.
”b 70Jesus told them, “Did I not choose you, the Twelve? And [yet] one of you is a devil!” 71Now, he was speaking about Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, for it was he who would betray him, and he was one of the Twelve.
 7 The Feast of Tabernacles After these things, Jesus went about in Galilee; he did not wish to travel around in Judea because the Jews were seeking to kill him.
 2Now, the feast of the Jews, the Feast of Tabernacles,c was at hand.
 3So his brothersd said to him, “Depart from here and go into Judea, so that your disciples may also see the works which you are accomplishing.
 4Certainly, no one who seeks to be known openly does anything in secret! If you do these things, reveal yourself to the world!” 5For even his brothers did not believe in him.
 6Jesus therefore said to them, “My time has not yet come, but your time is always ready.
 7The world cannot hate you, but it hates me, because I bear witness concerning it, that its works are evil.
 8You go up to the feast.
 I am not yete going up to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled.
” 9Having said these things to them, he remained in Galilee.
 10However, when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly, but as it were, in private.
f 11As a result, the Jews were looking for him at the feast, and they were asking, “Where is he?” 12There was much murmuringg among the multitudes concerning him.
 Some said, “He is a good man!” Others replied, “Not so, but he leads the multitude astray!” 13Still, no one spoke openly about him for fear of the Jews.
 14However, when it was the middle of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and began to teach.
 15At this, the Jews were amazed and said, “How does this man have such learningh without having been educated?” a Or “retreated” CT reads “the Holy [One] of God” based on P75, א, B, D, L, W.
 A few manuscripts read “the Christ, the Holy [One] of God” or “the Christ, the Son of God” c Or “Tents / Booths” d See Appendix E e CT omits “yet” f Or “in secret” g Or also “complaining / whispering” h Literally “know letters” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 248 16Jesus therefore answered them, “My teaching is not mine, but [it comes] from the one who sent me.
 17Anyone who desires to do God’sa will recognizeb the teaching, whether it is from God, or if I am speaking from myself.
c 18Whoever speaks from himself seeks his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of the one who sent him is true, and [there is] no unrighteousness in him.
 19Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why [then] do you seek to kill me?” 20The crowd replied, “You have a demon! Who is seeking to kill you?” 21Jesus answered them, “I did one work, and you all marvel because of it.
 gave you circumcision (not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and on the Sabbath, you circumcise a boy.
 23If a boy receives circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, [why] are you angry with me because I made a man completely healthy on the Sabbath? 24Do not judge according to appearance, but make a right judgment.
” 22Moses 25Then, some people from Jerusalem said, “Is this not the one whom they seek to kill? 26Behold, he is speaking openly, and they say nothing to him! Could it be indeed that the rulers acknowledge that this is truly the Christ? 27However, we know where this man comes from! But when the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from.
” 28Then Jesus cried out as he was teaching in the temple, “You both know me, and know where I am from.
 I have not come of myself, but he who sent me is true, and you do not know him.
 29I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.
” Officers are sent to arrest the Lord 30At this, they sought to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him because his hour had not yet come.
 31In fact, many in the multitude believed in him.
 They said, “When the Christ comes, he will not do more signs than the ones which this man has done, will he?” 32The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him.
 33Then Jesus said, “I will be with you a little while longer, then I go to him who sent me.
 34You will seek me and will not find me; and where I am, you cannot come.
” 35The Jews therefore said among themselves, “Where will this man go, so that we will not find him? Will he go to the Dispersion among the Greeks a Greek “his” Or “know about” c Or “on my own” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 250 [a[ 53And so, they went each one to his home.
 8 The woman caught in adultery But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
 2Now, at daybreak, he appeared again in the temple, and all the people came to him.
 He sat down and began to teach them.
 3Then, the scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman caught in [the act of] adultery.
 Making her stand before them all, 4they told him, “Teacher, we found this woman in adultery, in the very act.
 5Now in our law, Moses commanded us to stone such [a person].
b 6What then do you say?” They said this to test him, in order to have something to accuse him of.
 However, Jesus bent down and began to write on the ground with his finger.
 7But as they continued to ask him, he looked up and said to them, “Let the one who among you is without sin throw the first stone at her.
” 8Again he stooped down and wrote on the ground with his finger.
 9When they heard this,c they began to leave, one by one, starting from the oldest, even to the last.
 Jesus was left alone with the woman where she was, in the middle.
 10Standing up, Jesus saw her and said, “Woman, where are your accusers? Did no one condemn you?” 11She said, “No one, Sir.
”d Jesus replied, “Neither do I condemn you.
 Go your way! And from now on, sin no more.
” ]] The Light of the world – Witnesses to Jesus 12Then again, Jesus spoke to them, saying, “I am the light of the world.
e Whoever follows me will not walk in the darkness but will have the light of life.
” 13At this, the Pharisees said to him, “You bear witness to yourself! Your testimony is not valid!”f a Deuteronomy 17:6; 19:15 Or “I AM” – this verse, as much as 8:58 is a very strong affirmation of the Lord’s unique status (see note below).
 c The Greek is simply eva.
n ga.
r mh.
 pisteu,shte o[ti evgw, eivmi, but many translators feel that the concluding {he} is implied.
 NIV reads “if you do not believe that I am the one I claim to be” – NAB has “if you do not believe that I AM” – see note on John 8:58.
 d Or “judge” e See verse 24 f Or “to myself” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 252 About Abraham 30As he spoke these things, many believed in him.
 31Jesus therefore said to those Jews who had believed him, “If you remain in my word, then you are truly my disciples.
 32You will knowa the truth, and the truth will set you free!”b 33They answered him, “We are Abraham’s seed and have never been in bondage to anyone.
 How can you say, ‘You will be made free?’” 34Jesus answered them, “Amen, amen, I tell you; everyone who practices sin is the slave of sin! 35A slave does not live in the house forever, [but] a son remains forever.
 36If therefore the Son makes you free, you will be free indeed! 37I know that you are Abraham’s seed, yet you seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you.
 38I speak of what I have seen with my Father; and you also do the things which you have seen with your father.
” 39They answered him, “Our father is Abraham!” Jesus said to them, “If you were Abraham’s children, you would do the works of Abraham.
 40But now, you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth which I heard from God! Abraham did not do this.
 41You do the works of your father.
” They replied to him, “We were not born of sexual immorality! We have one father, God.
” 42Therefore, Jesus said to them, “If God were your father, you would love me, for I issue forth [from God] and have come from God.
c Indeed, I have not come of myself, but he has sent me.
 43Why do you not understand my speech? Because you cannot hear my word! 44You are of your father, the devil,d and you want to do the desires of your father.
 He was a murderer from the beginning and he does not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him.
 When he utters a lie, he speaks of his owne because he is a liar and the father of lies.
 45But because I tell the truth, you do not believe me.
 46Which of you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me? 47Whoever is of God hears the words of God.
 For this reason, you do not hear: because you are not of God.
” 48Then the Jews answered him, “Do we not say well that you are a Samaritan and have a demon?” a Or “have an intimate knowledge of / recognize / perceive” Psalms 119:45 / 118 LXX c Or “I came from God and now I am here” (as in NIV and NRS) d Greek diabo,lon (diabolos) – the dia-bolic is the opposite of sym-bolic, it is the disunity between the sign or word and what is real, as in Genesis 3:1-15 e Greek evk tw/n ivdi,wn lalei b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 254 6When he had said this, he spat on the ground, made mud with the saliva and anointed the blind man’s eyes with the mud.
 7He then said to him, “Go, wash in the pool of Siloam” (which means “Sent”).
 And so, the man went away, washed, and came back seeing.
 8At this, the neighbors and those who saw that he had been blind before said, “Is this not the man who sat and begged?” 9Others were saying, “It is he!” Still others were saying, “He looks like him.
” The man said, “I am he!”a your eyes opened?” 10Therefore, the people asked him, “How were 11He answered, “A man called Jesus made mud, anointed my eyes, and said to me, ‘Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash.
’ And so, I went away and washed, and I received sight.
” 12Then they asked him, “Where is he?” The man replied, “I do not know.
” 13They brought the man who had been blind to the Pharisees.
 14It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes.
 15Again, the Pharisees also asked the man how he had received his sight.
 He said to them, “He put mud on my eyes, I washed, and I see!” 16At this, some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God because he does not keep the Sabbath.
” Others said, “How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?” There was division among them.
 17Therefore, they asked the blind man again, “What do you say about him, since he opened your eyes?” He said, “He is a prophet!” 18The Jews did not believe [the report] about this man, that he had been blind and had received his sight until they called the parents of this man who had received his sight.
 19They asked the parents, “Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How then does he now see?” 20His parents answered, “We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind.
 21But how he now sees, we do not know; or who opened his eyes, we do not know.
 He is of age.
 Ask him! He will speak for himself.
” 22His parents said this because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that if anyone would confess Jesus as Christ, this person would be expelled from the synagogue.
 23Therefore, his parents said, “He is of age.
 Ask him!” 24And so, they called the man who had been blind a second time, and they told him, “Give glory to God! We know that this man is a sinner!” a Greek evgw.
 eivmi (which indicates that this idiomatic expression is fairly neutral – see note on 8:58).
 ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ 25At this, the man answered, “I do not know if he is a sinner.
 One thing I do know: that though I was blind, now I see!” 26Again, eyes?” they asked him, “What did he do to you? How did he open your 27He answered them, “I told you already, and you did not listen.
 Why do you want to hear it again? You do not also want to become his disciples, do you?” 28Then they insulted him and said, “You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.
 29We know that God has spoken to Moses; but as for this man, we do not know where he comes from.
” ACCORDING TO JOHN - ΚΑΤΑ ΙΩΑΝΝΗΝ At the Feast of the Dedication 22At that time, it was the Feast of the Dedicationa in Jerusalem.
 23It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon’s porch.
 24The Jews therefore gathered around him and asked him, “How long will you hold us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.
” 25Jesus answered them, “I told you, and you do not believe.
 The works that I do in my Father’s Name, these bear witness to me.
 26But you do not believe, because you are not of my sheep, as I told you.
 27My sheep hear my voice; I know them, and they follow me.
 28I give eternal life to them; they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
 29My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all.
 No one is able to snatch them out of my Father’s hand.
 30I and the Father are one.
” 31Again, the Jews picked up rocks to stone him.
 32Jesus told them, “I have shown you many good works from my Father.
 For which of those do you stone me?” 33The Jews answered him, “We do not stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy: because you, being a man, make yourself God.
”b 34Jesus answered them, “Is it not written in your law, ‘I said, you are gods?’c 35If he called them gods, (those to whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken), 36do you say of him whom the Father has consecratedd and sent into the world, ‘You blaspheme,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God?’ 37If I do not do the works of my Father, do not believe me.
 38But if I do them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works, so that you may recognizee and believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father.
” 39They sought again to seize him, but he escaped out of their hand.
 40He went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was baptizing at first, and he stayed there.
 41Many came to him, saying, “John indeed did no sign, but everything that John said about this man is true!” 42And many believed in him there.
 a The “Feast of the Dedication” is the Greek name for “Hanukkah,” a celebration of the rededication of the Temple (see 1 Maccabees 4:59) b Or possibly “a god” (see verses 34-35) c Psalms 82:6 / 81 LXX d Or “sanctified.
” This seems to be reference to Christ’s consecration as Great High Priest.
 e Or “know” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 258 11 The raising of Lazarus Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus of Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister, Martha.
 2It was that [same] Mary who had anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair and whose brother, Lazarus, was sick.
 3So the sisters sent [word] to Jesus, saying, “Lord, behold, he whom you lovea is sick!” 4But when Jesus heard it, he said, “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified by it.
” 5Now, Jesus lovedb Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.
 6Yet, when he heard that Lazarus was sick, he stayed two [more] days in the place where he was.
 7After this, he said to the disciples, “Let us go into Judea again.
” 8The disciples told him, “Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you, and you are going there again?” 9Jesus answered, “Are there not twelve hours of daylight? Someone who walks in the day does not stumble because he sees the light of this world.
 10But someone who walks in the night will stumble because the light is not in him.
” 11He said these things, and then added, “Our friend, Lazarus, has fallen asleep, but I am going so that I may awake him out of sleep.
” 12At this, the disciples said, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.
” 13Now, Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that he had spoken of taking rest in sleep.
 14And so, Jesus told them plainly, “Lazarus is dead.
 15I am glad for your sake that I was not there, so that you may believe.
 But, let us go to him.
” 16Then Thomas (who is called Didymus)c said to his fellow-disciples, “Let us go also, so that we may die with him.
”d 17And so, when Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been in the tomb four days already.
 18Now, Bethany was near Jerusalem, about two milese away.
 19Many of the Jews had joined the women around Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother.
 20Then, when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went and met him, but Mary stayed in the house.
 21Therefore, Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died! 22Even now, I know that whatever you ask of God, God will give you.
” 23Jesus replied, “Your brother will rise again.
” a falling headlong, his body burst open, and all his intestines gushed out.
d 19It became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem that in their language that field was called ‘Akeldama,’ that is, ‘The field of blood.
’) 20For it is written in the book of Psalms, ‘Let his habitation be made desolate, And let no one dwell in it;’e and, ‘Let another take his office of overseer’.
 f/g 21Therefore, of the men who have accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, 22beginning from the baptism of John and to the day that he was taken up from us, of these [men], one must become a witness with us of his resurrection.
”h THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 288 all witnesses of this fact.
 33Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, Jesusa has poured out what you now see and hear.
 34For David did not ascend into the heavens, but as he himself declared: ‘The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.
’b 35 36Therefore, let all the house of Israel know with assurance that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.
” 37Now, when the peoplec heard this, they were cut to the heart and asked Peter and the rest of the apostles, “Brethren, what shall we do?” 38Peter said to them, “Repent, and be baptized, every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
 39For the promise is to you, and to your children, and to all who are far away, even as many as the Lord our God will call to himself.
” 40With many other words, he was bearing witness and urging them, saying, “Save yourselves from this crooked generation!” 41Then, those who gladly received his word were baptized, and about three thousand souls were added on that day.
 Life in common 42They devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread, and to the prayers.
d 43Feare came on every soul, and many wonders and signs were accomplished through the apostles.
 44All who believed were together and had all things in common.
 45They sold their possessions and goods, and shared them with all, according to everyone’s need.
 46Day by day, they continued [to meet] with one accord in the temple, and broke bread at home, partaking of their food with gladness and simplicity of heart.
 47They praised God and were held in esteem by all the people.
 Every day, the Lord added to the Church those who were being saved.
 a Greek “he” Psalm 110:1 / 109 LXX c Greek “they” d The Greek expression is probably a reference to a set pattern of liturgical prayers.
 e Or “awe” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 3 The healing of a beggar at the temple gate Peter and John would go up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
a 2A certain man who was lame from his mother’s womb was being carried.
 Every day, he was laid at the gate of the temple (the one which is called ‘Beautiful’) to ask almsb from those entering the temple.
 3Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked to receive alms.
 4Then Peter, along with John, fixed his gaze on him and said, “Look at us!” 5The manc gave them attention, expecting to receive something from them.
 6But Peter said, “I have neither silver nor gold, but what I do have, I give to you.
 In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk!” 7Peter took the man by the right hand and raised him up.
 At once, his feet and ankles received strength.
 8Leaping up, the man stood up and began to walk! He entered with them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising God! 9When all the people saw him walking and praising God, 10they recognized that it was the man who used to sit at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, begging for alms; and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
 11As the lame man who had been healed held on to Peter and John, all the people were greatly astonished and ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon’s [Porch].
 Peter’s speech 12When Peter saw this, he answered to the people, “Men of Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you gaze at us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk? 13The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his servantd Jesus, whom you delivered up and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had determined to release him.
 14But you denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked for a murderer to be granted to you.
 15Then you killed the Authore of life, whom God raised from the dead.
 To this we are witnesses.
 16By faith in his Name, this man whom you see and know was made strong.
f Yes, the faith which comes through Jesus has given him this perfect soundness as you all can see.
 a 3:00 pm Greek evlehmosu,nhn (gift of mercy offered to those in need) c Greek “he” d Or in context “child” (Greek paido,j) e Greek avrchgo.
n (sometimes translated “Prince of life”) f A complex construction which could also be rendered “it is the Name of Jesus which, through faith in him” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 290 17Now, brethren, I know that you did this in ignorance, as did your leaders.
 this is how God fulfilled what he had announced by the mouth of all his prophets, [namely] that Christ should suffer.
 18Yet, 19Repent therefore, and turn back [to God], so that your sins may be blotted out, that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, 20and that he may send Christ Jesus who was in advanced ordained for you.
 21He must remained in heaven until the times of restoration of all things, which God announced long ago by the mouth of his holy prophets.
 22Indeed, Moses indeed said to the fathers, ‘The Lord God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brethren.
 You shall listen to him in all that he tells you.
 23And it shall be that every soul that will not listen to that prophet will be utterly cut off from among the people.
’a 24In fact, all the prophets that have spoken, from Samuel to those who followed after [him], have also announced these days.
 25You are the children of the prophets, and [children] of the covenant which God made with our fathers when he said to Abraham, ‘In your seed will all the families of the earth be blessed.
’b 26God, having raised up [to life] his servant Jesus, sent him to you first, in order to bless you as everyone of you turns away from his wicked ways.
” 4 Peter and John arrested As they were speaking to the people, the priests, the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them.
 2They were upset because the apostlesc were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
 3They arrested them and put them in custody until the next day, since it was now the evening.
 4But many of those who heard the word believed, and their number came to be about five thousand.
 5In the morning, their leaders, presbyters and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem.
 6Annas (the high priest) was there, along with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and others that were relatives of the high priest.
 7After placing the apostlesd in the middle of their assembly,e they inquired, “By what power, or in what Name, have you done this?” 8Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, addressed them: “Rulers of the people and presbyters of Israel; 9if we are examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man and by what means this man has been a Deuteronomy 18:15,18-19 Genesis 22:18; 26:4 c Greek “they” d Greek “them” e Greek “them” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ healed, 10let it be known to you all and to all the people of Israel that is it in the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth (whom you crucified and whom God raised from the dead) that this man stands here before you whole.
 11Jesusa is ‘the stone which was regarded as worthless by you, the builders, which has become the head of the corner.
’b 12There is salvation in no one else, and there is no other Name under heaven that is given among mortalsc by which we should be saved!” 13Now, seeing the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were uneducated and untrained men, they were amazed and recognizedd that these two mene had been with Jesus.
 14Seeing the man who had been healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it.
 15But after instructing them to step out of the council, they conferred among themselves, 16saying, “What shall we do to these men? Indeed, a remarkable miracle has been accomplished through them, as can plainly be seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.
 17Nevertheless, to prevent this from spreading any further among the people, let us threaten them so that from now on, they will no longer speak to anyone in this Name.
” 18They called the apostles and ordered them not to speak at all or to teach in the Name of Jesus.
 19But Peter and John answered them, “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves! 20But we cannot help telling the things which we saw and heard!” 21When they had further threatened the apostles, they let them go.
 They found no way to punish them on account of the people, because everyone glorified God for what had been done.
 22(Moreover, the man on whom this miracle of healing had been performed was more than forty years old).
 The prayer of the apostles 23After being released, the apostles came to their own [company] and reported everything that the chief priests and the presbyters had said to them.
 24When they heard it, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord and said, “O Lord, you are God who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them; 25who by the mouth of your servant,f David,g said, a Greek “he” Psalm 118:22 / 117 LXX c Greek avnqrw,poij (in the sense of “men, mankind, human race”) d Or “realized” e Greek “they” f Greek paido,j g CT reads “by the Holy Spirit, [through] [the] mouth of David” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 292 ‘Why do the nations rage, and the peoples plot a vain thing? 26 The kings of the earth take a stand, and the rulers take council together, against the Lord, and against his Christ.
’ ab 27For truly, in this city, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, along with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together against your holy child,c Jesus, whom you anointed.
 28They did whatever your hand and counsel had foreordained to happen.
 29And now, Lord, consider their threats and grant your servantsd to speak your word with complete boldness.
 30Stretch out your hand to heal, and may signs and wonders may be accomplished through the Name of your holy childe Jesus.
” 31When they had prayed, the place where they were gathered was shaken.
 They were all filled with the Holy Spirit and proclaimed the word of God with boldness.
 Sharing in the community 32The multitude of those who believed were of one heart and [one] soul.
 Not one of them claimed that anything he possessed was his own, but they had all things in common.
 33With great power, the apostles gave their witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and abundant grace was upon them all.
f 34No one among them lacked anything because those who owned lands or houses sold them.
 They brought the proceeds of what was sold 35and laid it at the feet of the apostles.
 Then, distribution was made to each, according to everyone’s need.
 36Joses, who was surnamed Barnabas by the apostles (which means ‘Son of Encouragement’) was a Levite, a man of Cyprus by race.
 37He sold a field that he owned and brought the money, laying it at the apostles’ feet.
 5 The death of Ananias and Sapphira Now, a certain man named Ananias, along with his wife Sapphira, [also] sold a possession.
 2He kept back part of the price (of which his wife was also aware) and brought the rest, laying it at the apostles’ feet.
 3But Peter said, “Ananias, how is it that Satan has filled your heart so as to lie to the a Christ (Greek) and Messiah (Hebrew) both mean Anointed One.
 Psalm 2:1-2 c Greek pai/da, also meaning “servant / boy” d Greek toi/j dou,loij e Greek pai/da, also meaning “servant / boy” f This last clause may also be translated “and they were all accorded great respect,” which is less likely.
 b Greek o[lhn th.
n evkklhsi,an (holon) related to the word ‘catholic’ (kat-holon)– see Appendix B.
 Or “held in high esteem” c Greek “they” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 294 council of the children of Israel.
 He then sent [word] to the prison to have the apostles brought in.
 22But the officers who came did not find them in the prison.
 They came back and reported, 23“We found the prison shut and locked, and the guards standing before the doors, but when we opened them, we found no one inside!” 24Now, when the high priest, the captain of the temple, and the chief priests heard these words, they were very perplexed about them, wondering what would come of this.
 25One [officer] came forward and told them, “Behold, the men whom you put in prison are [now] in the temple, standing and teaching the people.
” 26Then, the captain went with the officers and brought them without using force because they were afraid that the people might stone them.
 27Having brought the apostles, they made them appear before the Sanhedrin.
 The high priest questioned them, 28saying, “Did we not strictly order you not to teach in this Name? Behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching and intend to bring this man’s blood upon us!” 29But Peter and the apostles answered, “We must obey God rather than men! 30The God of our fathersa raised up Jesus, whom you killed by hanging him on a tree.
b 31God has exalted him with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior in order to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins.
 32We are hisc witnesses to these things, and so is the Holy Spirit that God has given to those who obey him.
” 33Hearing this, they were enraged and determined to kill them.
 34But someone stood up in the council, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law who was honored by all the people.
 He instructed that the apostles be put out for a while.
 35He said to them, “Men of Israel, consider carefully what you intend to do to these men.
 36Some time ago, Theudas arose, claiming to be someone.
 A number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves to him.
 He was [eventually] killed, all those who obeyed him were scattered, and it all came to nothing.
 37After this man, Judas of Galilee arose during the days of the census, and he led some people to follow him.
 He also perished, and all those who obeyed him were scattered abroad.
 38Now I tell you: stay away from these men and leave them alone.
 If this plan or work is of human origin, it will be overthrown.
 39But if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow it, and you would find yourselves fighting against God!” a Or “ancestors” Greek xu,lou which can also mean “wood / stake / stocks / cross” – a reference to Deuteronomy 21:23 LXX also cited in Galatians 3:13 c CT lacks “his” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 40They agreed with him.
 Summoning the apostles, they had them flogged and ordered them not to speak in the Name of Jesus; then, they released them.
 41The apostles left the Sanhedrin, rejoicing that they had been considered worthy to suffer dishonor for the sake of hisa Name.
 42Every day, in the temple and at home, they never stopped teaching and preaching that Jesus is the Christ.
 6 The apostles appoint seven assistants – About Stephen (Stephanos) Now, in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplying, a complaint arose from the Hellenistsb against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily service [of food distribution].
 2The Twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples and said, “It is not appropriate for us to abandon the word of God in order to serve tables.
 3Therefore, select from among you, brethren, seven men of good reputation, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom.
 We will appoint them over this necessary task 4and devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.
” 5These words pleased the whole multitude, and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch.
 6They presented these men to the apostles who prayed and laid their hands on them.
 7Thus, the word of God spread and the number of disciples greatly multiplied in Jerusalem, and a large number of {Levitical} priests became obedient to the faith.
 8Full of faith and power, Stephen performed great wonders and signs among the people.
 9But some of those who belonged to the synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called), along with Cyrenians, Alexandrians, and men from Cilicia and Asia reacted.
 They began debating with Stephen, 10but they were not able to withstand the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke.
 11Then, they secretly convinced [some] men to say, “We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God!” 12Having stirred up the people, the presbyters and the scribes came against Stephenc and arrested him.
 They brought Stephen before the Sanhedrin 13and produced false witnesses who said, “This man is always uttering blasphemies against this holy place and [against] the law.
 14We have even heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs a Or “the Name” The Hellenists were Jewish converts to the Church who used Greek language and culture.
 They were either proselytes (Greeks who had converted to Judaism, then Christianity) or of Hebrew descent.
 c Greek “him” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 296 which Moses delivered to us!” 15All the members of the council gazed at Stephena and saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
 7 Stephen’s discourse The high priest asked, “Are these things so?” 2Stephen answered, “Brothersb and fathers, hear me! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was [still] in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran.
 3And God said to him, ‘Leave your land and your relatives, and come into a land which I will show you.
’c 4This is how Abraham came out of the land of the Chaldaeans and lived in Haran.
 From there, when his father was dead, God moved him into this land, where you are now living.
 5He gave Abraham no inheritance in this land, no, not so much as to set his foot on it.
 But God had promised that he and his descendantsd would possess this land, even when Abraham was still without child.
 6God spoke in this way: that Abraham’s descendants would live as aliens in a foreign land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four hundred years.
 7‘I will judge the nation to which they will be in bondage,’ said God, ‘and after that [time], they will they come out and offer divine servicee to me in this place.
’f 8God also gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision.
 Then Abraham became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day.
 Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the Twelve patriarchs.
 9Filled with jealousy against Joseph, the patriarchs sold him into Egypt, but God was with him.
 10He delivered Josephg from all his afflictions and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, the king of Egypt.
 Pharaoh appointed him governor over Egypt and his entire house.
 11Now, a famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, along with great suffering, and our fathersh could not find any food.
 12But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers on a first visit.
 13On their second visit, Joseph was revealed to his brothers and Pharaoh learned about Joseph’s family.
 14Joseph sent [a message] and called his father Jacob as well as all his relatives (seventy-five souls).
 15So Jacob went down into a Greek “him” Or “brethren” c Genesis 12:1 d Literally “seed” e Greek latreu,sousi,n f Genesis 15:13-14 g Greek “him” h Or “ancestors” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ Egypt where he died, along with our fathers.
 16Later, they were brought back to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham had purchased for a price in silver from the children of Hamor of Shechem.
 17As the time of the promise which God had sworn to Abraham came close, the people were growing and multiplying in Egypt.
 18Then, a different king, one who did not know Joseph, came to power there.
 19This king took advantage of our race and mistreated our fathers, forcing them to abandon their babies, so that they would not stay alive.
 20At that time, Moses was born, and he was pleasing to God.
 For three months, he was nourished in his father’s house; 21and when he was thrown out, Pharaoh’s daughter took him and raised him as her own son.
 22Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was powerful in his words and actions.
 23But when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren, the children of Israel.
 24Seeing one of them treated unjustly, he defended and avenged a man who was oppressed, striking the Egyptian.
 25He supposed that his brethren would understand that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance;a but they did not understand.
 26The following day, Moses presented himself to them as they are quarreling and urged them to be at peace again, saying: ‘Men, you are brothers! Why do you wrong each other?’ 27But the man who was mistreating the other pushed Moses away, saying: ‘Who made you a ruler and a judge over us? 28Do you want to kill me, as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’b 29When he heard this, Moses fled and became a stranger in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
 30When forty years were fulfilled, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush.
 31When Moses saw it, he wonderedc at the sight.
 As he came close to see, a voice of the Lord came to him, [saying], 32‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
’d Moses trembled and did not dare to look.
 33The Lord said to him, ‘Take your sandals off of your feet, for the place where you stand is holy ground.
 34I have indeed seen the affliction of my people in Egypt and heard their groaning.
 I have come down to deliver them.
 Now come, I will send you into Egypt.
’e 35This Moses, whom they had rejected by saying: ‘Who made you a ruler and a judge?’—God sent as both a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
 36Having worked wonders and a The Greek word swthri,an also means “salvation” Exodus 2:14 c Or “was amazed” d Exodus 3:6 e Exodus 3:5,7-8,10 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 298 signs in Egypt, this man led them out in the Red Sea and in the wilderness for forty years.
 37It is that [same] Moses who said to the children of Israel, ‘The Lord our God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers; you shall listen to him.
a’b 38It is this Moses who was in the assemblyc in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai and with our fathers, receiving living oracles to give to us.
 39But our fathers would not be obedient to him; they rejected him and in their hearts, turned back to Egypt.
 40They told Aaron, ‘Make us gods that will go before us! As for this Moses who led us out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.
’d 41They made a calf in those days and brought a sacrifice to the idol, rejoicing in the works of their hands.
 42But God turned [away] and gave them up to offer divine service to the host of heaven,e as it is written in the book of the prophets: ‘Did you offer me slain animals and sacrifices [during the] forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel? 43 You took up the tabernacle of Moloch, the star of your god Rephan, the figures to which you expressed adoration.
 f [Therefore] I will carry you awayg beyond Babylon.
’ 44Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness which the one who had spoken to Moses had commanded him to build according to the pattern that he had seen.
 45It was handed down to our fathers, and in turn, they brought it with Joshua when they entered into the possession of the nations which God drove out before the face of our fathers.
 This tabernacle was there to the days of David, 46who found favor in the sight of God, and who prayed to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.
 47Yet, it was Solomon who built him a house.
 48However, the Most High does not dwell in places made with hands, as the prophet says: ‘Heaven is my throne, and the earth is a footstool for my feet.
 What kind of house will you build for me?’ says the Lord; ‘or what is the place of my rest? 50 Did not my hand make all these things?’h 49 a CT and MT omit “You shall listen to him” Deuteronomy 18:15 c Or “Church / congregation” d Exodus 32:1 e This idiom could also be translated “armies of the sky,” “angelic beings,” or “heavenly bodies.
” f proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) g Amos 5:25-27 LXX h Isaias (Isaiah) 66:1-2 b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 51You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resista the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, you do likewise.
 52Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? They [even] killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers.
 53You received the law as it was ordained by angels, and did not keep it!” Stephen’s martyrdom – His vision 54Now, when they heard these things, they were furious and gnashed their teeth at him.
 55But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.
 56He exclaimed, “Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!” 57At this, they shouted with a loud voice, blocking their ears, and rushed at him with one accord.
 58So they threw him out of the city and stoned him.
 The witnesses placed their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul.
 59As they were stoning Stephen, he called in prayer, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!”b 60Kneeling down, he cried out with a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them!” Having said this, he fell asleep.
 8 Persecution against the Church Now, Saul was in full agreement with Stephen’sc death.
 At that time, a great persecution arose against the Church which was in Jerusalem.
 The disciplesd were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except for the apostles.
 2Devout men buried Stephen and greatly lamented over him.
 3In the meantime, Saul was ravaging the Church, entering into every house and dragging both men and women off to prison.
 Philip in Samaria – Simon the sorcerer 4As a result, those who had been scattered abroad began to travel around, preaching the word.
 5Philip went down to the city of Samaria and proclaimed Christ to them.
 6When the people heard and saw the signs which Philip was accomplishing, they agreed to listen to what he was preaching.
 7(Indeed, unclean spirits were expelled from many of those who had them, and they came out shouting with a loud voice.
 Many who had been paralyzed and lame were healed, 8and there was great joy in that city).
 a Or “resist / fight against” This may be the first recorded instance of a prayer addressed directly to Jesus Christ as the Risen Lord.
 c Greek “his” d Greek “they” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 300 9But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who used to practice sorcery in the city.
 He amazed the people of Samaria, claiming to be a great one, 10and all listened to him, from the least to the greatest.
 They said, “This man is the power of God, of the great kind!” 11People listened to him because for a long time, he had amazed them with his sorceries.
 12But when they believed Philip [who was] preaching the Good News concerning the Kingdom of God and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
 13Simon himself also believed and after his baptism, he followed Philip closely.
 Seeing that signs and great miracles were taking place, he was amazed.
 14Now, when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them.
 15When they arrived, they prayed for the people,a so that they might receive [the]b Holy Spirit 16because the Holy Spiritc had not yet come upon any of them.
 (They had only been baptized in the Name of Christ Jesus).
 17Then, Peter and Johnd laid their hands on them, and they received [the] Holy Spirit.
 18Now, when Simon saw that the <Holy>e Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money, 19saying, “Give me also this power, so that whoever I lay my hands on may receive [the]f Holy Spirit!” 20But Peter said to him, “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money! 21You have no part or share in this {ministry} because your heart is not right before God.
 22Repent of this wickedness of yours and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may be forgiven you.
 23Indeed, I see that you are in the poison of bitterness and in the bondage of wickedness!” 24Simon answered, “Pray for me to the Lord, that none of the things which you have spoken [may] happen to me.
” 25After Peter and John had borne witness and spoken the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem and {on their way} preached the Good News in many villages of the Samaritans.
 a Greek “them” The Greek actually uses the indefinite, which means that the most literal translation would be “receive a h/Holy s/Spirit” c Greek “he” or “it” d Greek “they” e CT omits “Holy” f The Greek actually uses the indefinite, which means that the most literal and accurate translation would be “receive a h/Holy s/Spirit” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ Philip and the Ethiopian 26Then, an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, “Arise, and go toward the south, to the way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.
 This is a desert.
” 27So Philip arose and went; and behold, there was a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians.
 He was in charge of all her treasure and had come to Jerusalem to express adoration.
a 28He was returning and sitting in his chariot, reading the prophet Isaias (Isaiah).
 29The Spirit said to Philip, “Go near, and join yourself to this chariot.
” 30Philip ran to the eunuch and heard him reading Isaias (Isaiah) the prophet.
 He asked, “Do you understand what you are reading?” 31The man replied, “How can I, unless someone explains it to me?” He then begged Philip to come up and sit with him.
 32Now, the passage of the Scripture which he was reading was this: He was led as a sheep to the slaughter.
 As a lamb before his shearer is silent, so he does not open his mouth.
 In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away.
 Who will declare His generation? For his life is taken from the earth.
b 34The eunuch asked Philip, “Who is the prophet talking about? About himself, or about someone else?” 35Then Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, he proclaimed {the Good News about} Jesus to this man.
 36As they went on the way, they arrived to [a place with] some water, and the eunuch said, “Behold, here is water! What is keeping me from being baptized?” 37Philip said, ‘If you believe with all your heart, you may.
’ The man answered, ‘I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God!’c 38He commanded the chariot to stand still, and both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and Philip baptized him.
 39When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord snatched Philip away.
 The eunuch did not see him any more and went on his way rejoicing.
 40But Philip was found at Azotus.
 Passing through [that area], he preached the Good News to all the cities, until he reached Caesarea.
 a proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) b Isaias (Isaiah) 53:7,8 LXX, read at the Prokomede (preparation of the gifts before Liturgy).
 c CT and MT omit this verse which is found in PT and TR.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 302 9 Road to Damascus: Saul’s conversion and baptism But Saul, still breathing threats and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest.
 2He asked him for letters to the synagogues of Damascus, [giving permission] that if he found anyone who belonged to ‘the Way,’ whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
 3As Saul was on his journey and approaching Damascus, a light from heavena suddenly shone around him.
 4He fell on the earth and heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” 5He asked, “Who are you, Lord?” The Lord answered, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
b 6Now arise, go into the city, and [there] you will be told what you must do.
” 7The men who were travelling with Saulc stood speechless, hearing the sound, but seeing no one.
 8Saul got up from the ground, and when his eyes were opened, he could not see anyone.
 His fellow-travelers led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus.
 9Saul was without sight for three days, and he neither ate nor drank.
 10Now, a certain disciple named Ananias lived in Damascus.
 In a vision, the Lord said to him, “Ananias!” Ananias answered, “Behold, it is me, Lord!” 11The Lord said to him, “Arise, and go to the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judahd for someone named Saul, a man of Tarsus.
 For behold, he is praying, 12and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in and laying his hands on him, so that he might receive his sight.
” 13But Ananias answered, “Lord, I have heard about this man from many, how much evil he has done to your saints at Jerusalem.
 14Here, he has authority from the chief priests to bind all those who call upon your Name!” 15But the Lord said to him, “Be on your way, for he is my chosen vessel to bear my Name before nations and kings, and to the children of Israel.
 16For I will show him how much he must suffer for my Name’s sake.
” a Or “from the sky” TR adds “It is hard for you to kick against the goads” and inserts at the beginning of verse 6: “So he [Saul] trembling and astonished, said, “Lord, what do you want me to do? Then the Lord said to him” c Greek “him” d Or “Judas” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 17Ananias departed and entered into the house.
 Laying his hands on Saul, he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord who appeared to you on the road by which you came has sent me, so that you may receive your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit!” 18At once, something like scales fell from Saul’sa eyes, and he received his sight.
 He arose and was baptized, 19and after taking some food, he was strengthened.
 After staying for several days with the disciples who were at Damascus, immediately went in the synagogues to proclaim that Christ is the Son of God.
 21All who heard him were amazed, and asked, “Is this not the man who did such damage in Jerusalem to those who called on this Name? And had he not come here intending to bring them bound before the chief priests?” 20Saul 22But Saul grew even more in strength and confounded the Jews who lived at Damascus by proving that [Jesus]b is the Christ.
 Saul escapes Damascus - In Jerusalem 23After some time, the Jews conspired to kill Saul,c 24but their plot became known to him.
 Day and night, they watched the gates in order to be able to kill Saul,d 25but his disciples took him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.
 26When Saul arrived in Jerusalem, he tried to join himself to the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he {truly} was a disciple.
 27Nevertheless, Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles.
 Saul told them how he had seen the Lord on the way, that the Lord had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had boldly preached in the Name of Jesus.
 28So Saule stayed with them and moved about freely in Jerusalem, preaching boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus.
f 29He talked and debated with the Hellenists,g but they tried to kill him.
 30When the brethren became aware of this, they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him off to Tarsus.
 a Greek “his” Greek “this” c Greek “him” d Greek “him” e Greek “he” f CT omits “Jesus” g See note for 6:1 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 304 Peace – Peter’s miracles: Aeneas and Tabitha/Dorcas 31And so, the Churchesa throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace and were edified.
 Walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, they continued to grow.
 32Now, as Peter was traveling through all those regions, he also came down to [visit] the saints who lived in Lydda.
 33There, he found a certain man named Aeneas, who was paralyzed and who had been bedridden for eight years.
 34Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you! Get up and make your bed!” And immediately, he arose.
 35All who lived in Lydda and Sharon saw him and turned to the Lord.
 36Now, there lived in Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, (which, when translated means Gazelle).
b This woman was full of good works and acts of mercy.
 37But it happened that at this time, she became ill and died.
 She was washed and placed in an upper room.
 38As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, imploring him, ‘Do not to delay in coming to help us!” 39So Peter arose and went with them.
 When he arrived, the disciples led him into the upper room.
 All the widows stood by him weeping, showing [to Peter] the coats and garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them.
 40But having put everyone out [of the room], Peter knelt down and began to pray.
 Turning towards the body, he said, “Tabitha, get up!” She opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up.
 41Then Peter gave her his hand and raised her up.
 Calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive.
 42This became known all over Joppa, and many people believed in the Lord.
 43After this, Peterc stayed in Joppa for a while, lodging with Simon, a tanner.
 10 Cornelius receives a vision Now, there was a certain man in Caesarea whose named was Cornelius.
 He was a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment, 2a devout man who feared God with his entire household.
 He gave generous alms to the people and always prayed to God.
 3At about the ninth hour of the day,d he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him, and saying to him, “Cornelius!” a Other ancient manuscripts read “Church” (singular), which has some ecclesiological importance.
 The reading offered in the main text (TR, MT, PT) is the most consistent with Orthodox ecclesiology and with the second part of the verse.
 See Appendix B.
 b “Dorcas” is Greek for “Gazelle” c Greek “he” d 3:00 pm ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 4Gazing at the angel and being quite alarmed, Cornelius said, “What is it, Lord?” The angel replied, “Your prayers and alms have ascended as a memorial before God.
 5Now, send men to Joppa, and get Simon who is called Peter.
 6He is staying with a certain Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the seaside.
”a 7When the angel who had spoken to him had departed, Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout soldier from among his attendants.
 8Having explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa.
 Peter receives a vision, travels to Caesarea 9Now, on the next day, as they were on their way and approached the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about noon.
 10He became hungry and desired to eat, but while the meal was being prepared, he fell into a trance.
 11He saw heavenb opened and something like a great sheet let down on the earth by four corners and descending to him.
 12In it were all kinds of four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds of the sky.
 13Then a voice came to him, “Rise, Peter, kill and eat!” 14But Peter said, “Not so, Lord! I have never eaten anything that is profane or unclean!” 15Again, a second time, the voice spoke to him, “What God has cleansed, you must not call unclean.
” 16This happened three times, and immediately the vesselc was taken up into heaven.
 17As Peter was very perplexed regarding the meaning of the vision, behold, the men who had been sent by Cornelius found where Simon’s house was and stood at the gate.
 18They called and asked whether Simon, who was called Peter, was lodging there.
 19While Peter was pondering the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, threed men are looking for you.
 20Arise and go downstairs! Accompany them without hesitation, for I have sent them.
” 21Peter went down to [meet] the men and said, “Behold, I am the one you are looking for! Why have you come?” 22They replied, “Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man and one who fears God, someone well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews, was directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house and to listen to what you say.
” 23Then Peter invited them in and gave them lodging.
 On the next day, Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the brethren from Joppa a TR adds “This one will tell you what it is necessary for you to do.
” Or “the sky” c Or “container / object” d MT omits “three” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 306 accompanied him.
 24The following day, they entered into Caesarea.
 Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his relatives and close friends.
 25When Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and expressed adoration toa him.
 26But Peter raised him up, saying, “Stand up! I am also a man!” 27As he talked with Cornelius, he went in and found many people assembled.
 28Peter said to them, “You yourselves know that it is unlawful for a Jew to associate with or visit someone of another nation, but God has shown me that I should not call anyone profane or unclean.
 29Therefore, I have come without complaint when I was sent for.
 And so, I ask, why did you send for me?” 30Cornelius replied, “Four days ago, I was fasting until this hour, and at the ninth hour,b I was praying in my house.
 And behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing, 31and he said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer is heard, and your alms are remembered in the sight of God.
 32Therefore, send [messengers] to Joppa for Simon who is called Peter.
 He is staying in the house of Simon a tanner, by the seaside.
 When he comes, he will speak to you.
’ 33And so, I sent for you at once, and it was good of you to come! Now, we are all here present in the sight of God to hear everything that God has commanded you.
” Peter’s speech – Cornelius and his household are baptized 34Peter opened his mouth and said, “Truly, I perceive that God does not show favoritism;c 35but in every nation, whoever fears himd and works righteousness is acceptable to him.
 36God sent his word to the children of Israel, and the Good News of peace was preached by Jesus Christ—he is Lord of all.
 37You know what happened since the Good News was proclaimed throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after baptism was preached by John.
 38You know how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with [the]e Holy Spirit and with power, how Jesusf went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for God was with him.
 39We are witnesses of everything he did in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem.
 They put him to death, hanging him on a tree, 40but God raised him up the third day and allowed him to be seen.
 41Yet, he was not manifest to all the people but [only] to witnesses who were chosen beforehand by God, that is to us who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
 42He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that he is the one a proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) b 3:00 pm c Or “discrimination / partiality,” “God is not a respecter of persons” d Or perhaps “who is awed by him” e The Greek actually uses the indefinite f Greek “he” ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ who is appointed by God as the Judge of the living and the dead.
 43It is to him that all the prophets bear witness: that through his Name, everyone who believes in him will receive remission of sins.
” 44While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word.
 45The believers who had come with Peter and who were of the circumcision were amazed because the gift of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles.
 46Indeed, they heard them speaking in other languagesa and magnifying God.
 At this, Peter said, 47“Can anyone refuse the water to these people, seeing that they have received the Holy Spirit as well as we had, and say that they should not be baptized?” 48He then ordered that they be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ.
 After this, they asked him to stay for a few days.
 11 Peter returns to Jerusalem – He explains his actions in Caesarea Now, the apostles and the brethren who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
 2When Peter returned to Jerusalem, those who were of the circumcision criticized him, 3saying, “You went into the house of uncircumcised people and ate with them!” 4But Peter began to speak and explained things to them in order: 5“I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision: a certain container like a great sheet was let down from heaven by four corners, descending and coming down as far as me.
 6When I had looked intently at it and examined [it], I saw the four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, creeping things, and birds of the sky.
 7I also heard a voice saying to me, ‘Rise, Peter, kill and eat!’ 8But I said, ‘Not so, Lord, for nothing profane or unclean has ever entered into my mouth!’ 9But a voice out of heaven answered me the second time, ‘What God has cleansed, do not call unclean!’ 10This was done three times, and everything was drawn back into heaven.
 11At that very moment, three men stood before the house where I was staying, having been sent to me from Caesarea.
 12The Spirit told me to go with them, without discriminating.
 These six brothersb also accompanied me, and we entered into the man’s house.
 13He told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house, and saying to him, ‘Send [messengers] to Joppa, and get Simon, who is called Peter.
 14He will speak to you the words by which you will be saved, you and your entire household.
’ 15As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell upon them, even as on us at the beginning.
 16I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, a b Or “tongues” Or “brethren” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 308 ‘John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit.
’ 17And so, if God gave them the same gift that he gave us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to oppose God?” 18When they heard these things, they held their peace and glorified God, saying, “Then God has also granted to the Gentiles the repentance [which produces] life!” In Antioch – Agabus announces a famine 19Now, those who had been scattered abroad by the oppression that arose in connection with Stephen had traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, and they were only proclaiming the word to Jews.
 20But some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, spoke to the Greeks and preached the Lord Jesus when they arrived in Antioch.
 21The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.
 22News of these things came to the ears of the Church which was in Jerusalem.
 So, they sent out Barnabas to go as far as Antioch.
 23When he arrived and saw the grace of God, he rejoiced.
 He encouraged them all to remain close to the Lord with a resolute heart.
 24Indeed, Barnabas was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and many people were added to the Lord.
 25Then Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for Saul, 26and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch.
 So it was that for a whole year, they assembled with the Church and taught many people.
 The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.
 27Now, in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
 of them, named Agabus, stood up and predicted through the Spirit that a great famine would take place all over the world; and it happened in the days of Claudius.
a 29According to their ability, each one of the disciples determined to send relief to the brethren who lived in Judea.
 30This is indeed what they did, sending their gift to the presbyters through the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
 28One 12 Herod’s persecution – James is martyred About that time, King Herod took actions to oppress some of the [members of the] Church.
 2He had James, the brother of John, killed with the sword.
 3When Herodb saw that it pleased the Jews, he went on to arrest Peter as well.
 (This was during the days of unleavened bread).
 4After arresting Peter, he put him in prison and delivered him to four squads of a b Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus or Claudius I (10 BC–54 AD).
 Compare Revelation 6:6 Greek “he” ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ four soldiers to guard him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
 5And so, Peter was kept in the prison, but constant prayer was made by the Church to God for him.
 6The same night, when Herod was about to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, while guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison.
 7Suddenly, an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell.
 Stricking Peter on the side, he woke Peter up, saying, “Stand up quickly!”, and Peter’s chains fell off from his hands.
 8The angel said to him, “Get dressed and put on your sandals!” and Petera did so.
 Then the angel said, “Put on your cloak and follow me!” 9Peter went out and followed the angel, but he did not realize that what was being done by the angel was real,b thinking that he was seeing a vision.
 10When they were past the first and second guard, they arrived at the iron gate which leads into the city, and it opened to them by itself.
 Having gone through, they went down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
 11When Peter came to himself, he exclaimed, “Now I truly know that the Lord has sent out his angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod and from all that the Jewish people were expecting.
” 12After pondering on this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John whose other namec was Mark, where many were gathered together and praying.
 13When Peter knocked at the outer gate, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer.
 14When she recognized Peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed that she did not open the door! Instead, she ran in and announced that Peter was standing in front of the gate.
 15But they said to her, “You are crazy!” When she insisted that it was so, they said, “It is his angel!” 16Meanwhile Peter continued knocking.
 When they opened [the door], they saw him and were amazed.
 17But he motioned them with his hand to be silent and told them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison.
 He said, “Tell these things to James,d and to the brethren.
” Then he departed, and went to another place.
 18As soon as it was day, there was no small commotion among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.
 19When Herod had Peter looked for and could not find him, he interrogated the guards and ordered that they should be put to death.
 Meanwhile, Peter went down from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there.
 a Greek “he” Greek avlhqe,j c See verse 24 and note d This is the first reference to “James” as leader of the Church in Jerusalem.
 The identity of this “James” with James of Alphaeus and the title of “brother of the Lord” are discussed in Appendix E.
 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 310 Herod’s death 20At that time, Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon.
 With one accord, they came to him, and, having befriended Blastus (the king’s personal aide), they asked for peace because their country depended on the king’s country for food.
 21On an appointed day, Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat on the throne, and gave a speech to them.
 22The people shouted, “The voice of a god,a not of a man!” 23Immediately, an angel of the Lord struck him, because he did not give God the glory, and he was eaten by worms and died.
 Barnabas and Saul – First travels 24Meanwhile, the word of God grew and multiplied.
 25After completing their service, Barnabas and Saul returned fromb Jerusalem, and they also took with them John whose other namec was Mark.
 13 Now, in the Church that was at Antioch, there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen the foster brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
 2As they were liturgizingd to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.
” 3Then, after fasting and praying, they laid their hands on Barnabas and Saule and sent them on their way.
 4Being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia and from there sailed to Cyprus.
 5When they were at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues, with John as their attendant.
 6After going through the island to Paphos, they met a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar Jesus.
 7He was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus.
 Being an intelligent man, the proconsul called Barnabas and Saul in order to hear the word of God.
 8However, Elymas the sorcerer (this is his name when translated) opposed them, seeking to turn the proconsul away from the faith.
 9But filled with the Holy Spirit, Saul (who is also called Paul), fixed his eyes on Elymasf 10and said, “You are full of all [kinds of] deceit and cunning, you son of the devil and enemy of all righteousness! Will you not stop perverting the right ways of the Lord? 11And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is against you! You will be blind, unable to see the sun for a season!” a Greek Qeou/ fwnh.
 TR agrees with PT.
 CT and MT have “from” c Or “surname / nickname / usual name” d Greek leitourgou,ntwn e Greek “them” f Greek “him” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ At once, mist and darkness fell upon Elymasa, and he began to grope around seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
 12When the proconsul saw what had taken place, he believed and was amazed by the teaching of the Lord.
 13Now, Paul and his company set sail from Paphos to Perga in Pamphylia where John left them to return to Jerusalem.
 14Continuing from Perga, they came to Antioch of Pisidia.
 There, they went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat down [to listen].
 15After the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent them a message, “Brethren, if you have any word of exhortation for the people, speak!” Paul speaks in a synagogue 16So Paul stood up, motioned with his hand, and said, “Men of Israel and you [Gentiles] who fear God, listen! 17The God of this people Israel chose our fathers and made the people prosper when they lived as aliens in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm, he led them out of it.
 18For a period of about forty years, he put up with them in the wilderness.
 19After destroying seven nations in the land of Canaan, Godb gave them their land as an inheritance, and this took about four hundred fifty years.
 20After this, he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.
 21Then they asked for a king, and God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin [who ruled] for forty years.
 22After removing him, Godc raised up David to be their king, even bearing witness to him, ‘I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.
’ 23From this man’s seed, God has brought salvationd to Israel, according to his promise.
 24This was before the coming of Jesus,e when John first preached the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.
 25As John was completing his work, he said, ‘Who do you suppose that I am? I am not he! But behold, one comes after me whose sandalsf I am unworthy to untie.
’ 26Brethren, children of the line of Abraham, and those among you [Gentiles] who fear God, this messageg of salvation has been sent to you! 27Indeed, those who live in Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize him or the voices of the prophets which are read every Sabbath.
 Still, by condemning him, they fulfilled the prophets! 28Although they could find no cause for his execution, they asked Pilate to have Jesush killed.
 29After fulfilling all the a Greek “him” Greek “he” c Greek “he” d TR and CT read “a Savior, Jesus” instead of “salvation.
” MT agrees with PT.
 e Greek “his coming” f Greek “the sandal of {his} feet” g Or “word” h Greek “him” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 312 things that were written about him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a tomb.
 30But God raised him from the dead, 31and he was seen for many days by those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem.
 They are his witnesses to the people.
 32And now, we bring you the Good News that the promise made to the fathers has come about: 33God has fulfilled it for us, their children, by raising up Jesus.
 As it is also written in the second psalm: ‘You are my Son.
 Today I have become your father.
’a 34That God raised him up from the dead to never again return to corruption, he has declared in these words: ‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.
’b 35Therefore, he also says in another psalm, ‘You will not allow your holy one to see decay.
’c 36Then, after having in his own generation served God’s purpose, David fell asleep.
 He was laid with his fathers and saw decay.
 37But he whom God raised up did not see decay! 38Therefore, may you know, brethren, that through this man the remission of sins is proclaimed to you! 39By him, everyone who believes is justifiedd from all things, things from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses.
 40Beware therefore, for fear that what is spoken in the prophets may come on you: ‘Behold, you scoffers, be amazed, and perish! For in your days, I [shall] accomplish a work, which you will not believe, even if one would proclaim it to you.
’e 42And so, as Paul and Barnabasf were leaving the synagogue of the Jews, the Gentiles begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath.
g 43Now, when the congregation was dismissed, many Jews and devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas who spoke to them and encouraged them to persevere in the grace of God.
 44The next Sabbath, almost the entire city was gathered to hear the word of God! 45But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with jealousy and contradicted what Paul said with insults.
h a Psalm 2:7 Isaias (Isaiah) 55:3 c Psalm 16:10 / 15 LXX d Greek dikaiou/tai e Habakkuk 1:5 f Greek “they” g Text is uncertain – another possible reading is “As they went out, the people begged that these things might be told them the next Sabbath” (RSV).
 h Or “and blasphemed” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ Turning to the Gentiles 46Then Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, saying, “It was necessary that God’s word should be spoken to you first.
 But since you are rejecting it and consider yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles! 47For this is what the Lord has commanded us, saying: ‘I have set you as a light for the Gentiles, So that you should bring salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth.
’a 48When the Gentiles heard this, they rejoiced and glorified the word of God, and as many as were appointed to eternal life believed.
 49Thus, the Lord’s word was spread throughout the entire region.
 50But the Jews stirred up the devout and prominent women as well as the leading men of the city.
 They instigated a persecution against Paul and Barnabas and expelled them from their borders.
 51So the apostlesb shook off the dust of their feet against these people and went to Iconium.
 52And the disciples were filled with joy with the Holy Spirit.
 14 In Iconium and Lystra In Iconium, both Paul and Barnabas entered into the synagogue of the Jews.
 They spoke in such a way that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed.
 2But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up and poisoned the souls of the Gentiles against the brethren.
 3Therefore, Paul and Barnabas stayed there for a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord.
 Moreover, the Lord bore witness to the wordc of his grace,d granting that signs and wonders be done by their hands.
 4However, the city was divided.
 Some sided with the Jews, and some with the apostles.
 5Then, a group of Gentiles and Jews, along with their leaders, plotted to attack and stone them.
 6But Paul and Barnabas became aware of it and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and to the surrounding region.
 7There, they continued to preach the Good News.
 8At Lystra, there was a certain man sitting without strength in his feet.
 He was a cripple from his mother’s womb and he had never walked.
 9He was listening to Paul speak when Paul fixed his eyes on him.
 Seeing that the man had faith to be healed, 10Paul said with a loud voice, “Stand up on your feet!” And the man jumped up and began to walk.
 11When the people saw a Isaias (Isaiah) 49:6 Greek “they” c Or “message / proclamation” d Greek ca,ritoj (“underserved or gratuitous kindness or mercy) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 314 what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, shouting in the language of Lycaonia, “The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!” 12They called Barnabas “Jupiter” and Paul “Mercury,” because he was the chief speaker.
 13The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was in front of their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and they wanted to offer a sacrifice along with the crowd.
 14But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of this, they tore their clothes and rushed into the crowd, crying out, 15“Friends, why are you doing these things? We are men just like you, bringing you the Good News so that you should turn away from these vain things toward the living God who made the heaven,a the earth and the sea, and all that is in them.
 16In past generations, he allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways.
 17However, he did not leave himself without witness: he did good and gave you rains from the sky as well as fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.
” 18Even by saying these things, they could hardly prevent the multitudes from offering a sacrifice to them.
 19Then, some Jews from Antioch and Iconium arrived and won the crowd over.
 They stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, thinking that he was dead.
 20But as the disciples stood around him, he got up and returned into the city.
 On the next day, he and Barnabas left for Derbe.
 Return to Antioch 21After preaching the Good News to that city and having made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch.
 22They strengthened the souls of the disciples and exhorted them to continue in the faith, [saying] that “we must go through many afflictions to enter the Kingdom of God.
” 23After appointing presbyters for them in every Church, with prayer and fasting, Paul and Barnabas committed them to the Lord in whom they placed their trust.
 24They passed through Pisidia and arrived in Pamphylia.
 25After preaching the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
 26From there, they sailed to Antioch from where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had now fulfilled.
 27When they arrived, they gathered the Church and reported all that God had accomplished with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
 28They stayed there with the disciples for some time.
 a Or “sky” ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 15 The council in Jerusalem Then, certain men came down from Judea {to Antioch} and taught the brothers,a “Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved!” 2As a result, Paul and Barnabas had no small dispute and controversy with them.
 Therefore, the brethren appointed Paul, Barnabas and some of their own to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and presbyters regarding this question.
 3Having been sent on their way by the Church,b they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, relating the conversion of the Gentiles and causing great joy to all the brethren.
 4When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were received by the Church, the apostles and the presbyters, and they reported all that God had accomplished with them.
 5However, some believers from the sect of the Pharisees arose and said, “It is necessary to circumcise them and to command them to keep the law of Moses!” 6The apostles and the presbyters gathered together to discuss this matter.
 there had been much discussion, Peter stood up and said to them, “Brethren, you know that some time ago, God made a choice among you, that by my mouth the nations should hear the word of the Good News and believe.
 8God, who knows the heart, bore witness to them by giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he had done to us.
 9He made no distinction between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.
 10And now, why do you put God to the test by putting a yoke on the neck of the disciples, one which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? 11But we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus,c just as they are.
” 7When 12At this, the whole multitude kept silence.
 They listened to Barnabas and Paul report what signs and wonders God had accomplished among the nations through them.
 13When they had finished, James said, “Brethren, listen to me! 14Simeon has reported how God first showed concern towards the Gentiles in order to take from them a people for his Name.
 15This agrees with the words of the prophets.
 As it is written: ‘After these things I will return.
 I will again build the tabernacle of David, which has fallen.
 I will again build its ruins.
 I will set it up, So that the rest of the people may seek after the Lord; a Or “brethren,” but in this context addressed to men only The Church of Antioch c TR adds “Christ” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 316 All the Gentiles who are called by my Name, Says the Lord, who does all these things.
a All his works are known to God from eternity.
’ 19Therefore, I judgeb that we should not trouble those who turn to God from among the Gentiles.
 20Instead, we should write to them to abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood.
 21For from generations of old, Moses has had in every city those who preach him, being read every Sabbath in the synagogues.
” The letter from Jerusalem – Envoys are sent to Antioch 22Then it seemed good to the apostles and the presbyters, along with the whole Church, to choose some of their own men and to send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas (called Barsabbas) and Silas, [who were] leading men among the brethren.
 23Through their hands,c they wrote: “The apostles, the presbyters, and the brethren; to the brethren who are of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: greetings! 24We have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you with words and unsettled your souls by saying: ‘You must be circumcised and keep the law,’ although they had no such commission from us.
 25Having assembled with one accord, it has seemed good to us to select men and to send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 26men who have risked their lives for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
 27Therefore, we have sent Judas and Silas, who will also tell you the same things by word of mouth.
 28It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us to impose no greater burden on you than what is necessary: 29that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols,d from blood,e from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality.
 If you abstain from these things, it will be well with you.
 Farewell!” 30Accordingly, the men were sent off and arrived in Antioch where they gathered the community and delivered the letter.
 31The people read it and rejoiced over the encouragement.
 32Judas and Silas (who were also prophets) encouraged the brethren with many words and strengthened them.
 33After spending some time there, they were sent back with greetings from the brethren to the apostles.
 34(But it seemed good to Silas a Amos 9:11-12 evgw.
 kri,nw can have a strong sense (“I decree”) or a mild one (“I think / I consider”) c It is unclear whether the delivery or redaction of the letter was done through the hands of the envoys.
 d Compare Revelation 2:20 e Compare Genesis 9:4 – this prohibition is maintained in the Orthodox Church (Apostolic Canons, canon 63; Council in Trullo, canon 67) b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ to remain there).
 35Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord with many others.
 Parting of ways between Paul and Barnabas 36After some time, Paul said to Barnabas, “Let us revisit our brethren in every city where we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing!” 37Barnabas planned to take John (who was called Mark) along with them.
 38However, Paul did not think that it was a good idea to take with them someone who had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in the work.
 39Then, the disagreement became so intense that they separated from each other.
 Barnabas took Mark with him and sailed away to Cyprus.
 40But Paul chose Silas and having been entrusted by the brethren to the grace of God, they departed.
 41Paul went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the Churches.
 16 About Timothy Paul then came to Derbe and Lystra.
 And behold, a certain disciple named Timothy lived there.
 He was the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek.
 2This disciple was well spoken of by the brethren who were at Lystra and Iconium.
 3Paul wanted to have Timothy along on the journey, so he had him circumcised because of the Jews who were in those parts, since all knew that his father was a Greek.
 4As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered to the brethrena the decisions which had been ordained by the apostles and presbyters who were at Jerusalem, so that they might obey.
 5As a result, the Churches were strengthened in the faith and increased in number every day.
 Paul’s vision – To Macedonia 6After going through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to preach the word in Asia.
 7When they arrived to the border of Mysia, they tried to go into Bithynia but the Spirit did not allow them.
 8So they passed by Mysia and came down to Troas.
 9During the night, a vision appeared to Paul: a man of Macedonia was standing, begging him, and saying, “Come over into Macedonia and help us!” 10After Paul had seen the vision, we immediately tried to cross over to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the Good News to them.
 a Greek “them” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 318 To Greece 11Having set sail from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and the following day to Neapolis.
 12From there, we sailed to Philippi which is a city of Macedonia, the foremost of the district and a Roman colony.
 We stayed for some time in this city.
 13On the Sabbath day, we went outside the city by a riverside where we expected that there would be a place of prayer.
 We sat down and spoke to the women who had gathered there.
 14A certain woman heard us: one named Lydia, a seller of purple [cloth], from the city of Thyatira.
 She feareda God and the Lord opened her heart to listen to what Paul was saying.
 15When she and her household were baptized, she begged us, “If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and stay!” And so, she persuaded us.
 An exorcism – Paul and Silas arrested 16As we were going to prayer, it happened that we encountered a certain girl who had a spirit of divination and who produced much profit to her masters by fortune telling.
 17As she followed Paul and us, she cried out, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us a way of salvation!” 18And she did this for many days.
 But Paul, becoming greatly annoyed, turned back and said to the spirit, “In the Name of Jesus Christ, I order you to come out of her!” And the spirit came out that very moment.
 19When her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas, and dragged them into the marketplace to face the authorities.
 20Having brought them to the magistrates, they said, “These Jewish men are causing unrest in our city! 21They teach customs which it is not lawful for us Romans to accept or observe!” 22When the crowd also rose up against them, the magistrates had them stripped and flogged.
 23After giving them a severe flogging, the magistrates had them thrown into prison, ordering the jailer to keep them securely.
 24Having received such a command, he threw them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
 25But when it was about midnight, Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.
 26Suddenly, there was a great earthquake, so violent that the foundations of the prison were shaken.
 At once, all the doors were opened, and everyone’s bonds were loosened.
 27The jailer, awaken from sleep and seeing the prison doors open, began to draw his sword and he was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
 28But Paul cried with a loud voice, “Do not harm yourself, for we are all here!” a Greek sebome,nh ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 29Having asked for lights, the jailer rushed in and fell down trembling before Paul and Silas.
 30He brought them out and asked, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?” 31They answered, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and you will be saved, you and your household!” 32Then they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to all those who were in his household.
 33Late as it was, the jailer washed their wounds and was immediately baptized, he and his entire household.
 34He took them into his house and set food before them.
 He was filled with joy for believing in God, along with his entire household.
 35But when day came, the magistrates sent the sergeants with the order, “Let those men go.
” 36The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, “The magistrates have sent word to let you go! Now you may come out and go in peace.
” 37But Paul said to the sergeants,a “They have beaten us in public, without a trial, even though we are Roman citizens, and you have thrown us into prison! And now they want to release us in secret? No indeed! Let them come themselves and bring us out!” 38The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates, and hearing that Paul and Silasb were Romans, they became afraid.
 39Therefore, they came and pleaded with them.
 When they had escorted them out, the officials asked them to leave the city.
 40So, they left the prison and went to Lydia’s house where they met the brethren and encouraged them.
 Then, they departed.
 17 Paul in Thessalonica After passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, Paul and Silas arrived in Thessalonica where there was a Jewish synagogue.
 2As was his custom, Paul gave them his attention and for three Sabbath days, he reasoned with them from the Scriptures.
 3He explained and showed that the Christ had to suffer and rise again from the dead, saying, “This Jesus whom I proclaim to you is the Christ.
” 4Some of the Jewsc were convinced and joined Paul and Silas, together with a large number of God-fearing Greeks and not a few of the leading women.
 a Greek “them” Greek “they” c Greek “them” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 320 5But the unconvinceda Jews took along some wicked men from the marketplace, gathered a crowd and set the city in an uproar.
 Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out to the people.
 6But not finding them, they dragged Jason and some of the brethren before the city officials, shouting, “These people who have turned the world upside down have also come here, 7and Jason has received them! All of them act in opposition to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus!” 8The multitude and the city officials were troubled when they heard these things.
 9After receiving a bond from Jason and the others, they let them go.
 In Beroea – Praise of the Beroeans 10At once, the brethren sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea.
 When they arrived, they went into the Jewish synagogue.
 11Now, the Beroeansb were more open-mindedc than the people of Thessalonica: they received the word with great eagerness of mind and examined the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were true.
 12As a result, many of them believed, as well as some Greek women of high standing, and a fair number of Greek men.
 13But when the Jews of Thessalonica learned that Paul was also proclaiming the word of God at Beroea, they came there to stir up the crowds.
 14Then, the brethren immediately led Paul away to the coast,d while Silas and Timothy remained there.
 15But those who escorted Paul took him as far as Athens, and they left instructions for Silas and Timothy that they should join Paul very quickly.
 Then, they departed.
 In Athens – Paul’s speech at the Areopagus 16Now, as Paul was in Athens waiting for them, his spirit was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols.
 17And so, he began to debate in the synagogue with the Jews and the [Gentile] God-fearers, and every day in the marketplace with the people that he met.
 18Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also had discussions with him.
 Some said, “What is this babbler trying to say?” Others suggested, “He seems to be advocating foreign deities,” because he was preaching Jesus and [Anastasin] ‘the resurrection’.
e a TR reads “the unconvinced Jews, becoming envious, took along” instead of “the unconvinced Jews took along.
” CT omits “unconvinced” but includes “becoming envious.
” MT and PT have “unconvinced” but not “becoming envious” b Greek “these” c Or “noble,” “noble-minded” d Greek “to go as far as to the sea” e The Greek word for resurrection (avna,stasin) may be misunderstood as a proper feminine noun ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 19So they took him [by the arm] and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, “May we know what this new teaching that you proclaim is all about? 20You certainly bring some strange things to our ears! Therefore we want to know what all this is about.
” 21Now, all the Athenians and the strangers living there spent their time doing nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.
 22So Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus, and said, “Athenians! I perceive that you are very religiousa in all things.
 23In fact, as I passed along and observed your sacred monuments, I also found an altar with this inscription: ‘To an unknown God.
’ What therefore you revereb in ignorance, this is what I announce to you! 24The God who made the world and all things in it, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in sanctuaries made with hands! 25Neither is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives to all life, breath, and everything else.
 26From one, he has made every nation to dwell on the entire surface of the earth (having determined the times and boundaries of their habitation).
 27God did this so that people should seek the Lordc and perhaps reach out for him and find him, although he is not far from each one of us.
 28‘For in him we live, and move, and have our being!’ As some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his offspring.
’d 29Since we are God’s offspring, we should not think that the divinitye is like gold, silver, or stone, engraved by human art and imagination.
 30In the past, God overlooked such ignorance, but now, he commands that all people everywhere should repent, 31because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained.
 He has given assurance of this to all by raising him from the dead.
” 32Now, when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; but others said, “We want to hear you again on this matter.
” 33Paul then left their company.
 34Still, a few people joined with him and believed.
 Among them was Dionysius the Areopagite, a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
 a Or “fearful of the gods.
” The word may have a negative meaning (“superstitious” as in KJV) but it is very unlikely in context.
 b Greek euvsebei/te (conveys the idea of fulfilling religious duties or rites) c Other manuscripts read “seek God” d The Greek ge,noj also means “family / nation / people” e Greek qei/on THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 322 18 Paul in Corinth After this, Paul left Athens and went to Corinth.
 2There, he met a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by race.
 He and his wife Priscilla had recently arrived from Italy because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome.
 Paul went to see them, 3and since he practiced the same trade (they were tent makers), he lived and worked with them.
 4Every Sabbath, he reasoned in the synagogue and persuaded both Jews and Greeks.
 5When Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was dedicated to preaching, bearing witness to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.
 6Then, when the Jews opposed Paul and blasphemed, he shook out his clothing and told them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am clean.
 From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!” 7He departed and went into the house of a man named Titus Justus, a [Gentile] devoted to God, whose house was next door to the synagogue.
 8Now, Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord with his entire household; and many Corinthians, when they heard, believed and were baptized.
 9One night, the Lord said to Paul by a vision, “Do not be afraid! Speak out and do not be silent.
 10I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many people in this city.
” Paul accused 11Paul lived there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among the people of Corinth.
a 12However, when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose up with one accord against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat, 13saying, “This man convinces people to express adoration tob God in opposition to the law.
” 14But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, “If you Jews were complaining about a matter of wrongdoing or about a wicked crime, it would be reasonable that I should bear with you.
 15However, if these are questions about words and names and your own law, deal with it yourselves, for I do not want to be a judge of these matters.
” 16And he had them removed from the court.
 17Then, they turned on Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him in front of the tribunal, but Gallio did not care about any of these things.
 a b Greek “them” Here, “worship” is used to translate se,besqai, not proskuneo ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ Return to Antioch 18After this, Paul stayed some time longer.
 He then took his leave of the brethren and set sail from Corinth to Syria, together with Priscilla and Aquila.
 In Cenchreae, he shaved his head on account of a vow which he had made.
 19Arriving in Ephesus, he left Priscilla and Aquila there, but he himself entered into the synagogue and debated with the Jews.
 20When they asked him to stay with them a longer time, he declined.
 21However, taking his leave of them, he said, “I must by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will come back to you if God wills.
” He then set sail from Ephesus.
 22After landing at Caesarea, he went to greet the Church, and then traveled down to Antioch.
 23Having spent some time there, he departed and went through the region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in order, strengthening all the disciples.
 Apollos 24Now, a certain Jew named Apollos who was an Alexandrian by race and an eloquent man arrived in Ephesus, and he was powerful with the Scriptures.
 25He had been instructed in the way of the Lord, and being ferventa in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately about Jesus, although he had only experienced the baptism of John.
 26Apollos began to speak boldly in the synagogue, but when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside and explained to him the way of God more accurately.
 27When Apollos had determined to cross over into Achaia, the brethren encouraged him and wrote to the disciples to receive him.
 When he arrived there, he greatly helped those who had believed through grace, 28for he powerfully refuted the Jews, publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.
 19 Paul in Ephesus – Baptism and the Holy Spirit - Miracles It happened that, while Apollos was in Corinth, Paul had passed through the upper country and arrived in Ephesus.
 There, he found some disciples 2and asked them, “Did you receive [the]b Holy Spirit when you believed?” They replied, “No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit!” 3Paul a b asked, “Then, into what were you baptized?” Or “zealous” The Greek actually uses the indefinite, which means that the most literal and accurate translation would be “receive a h/Holy s/Spirit” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 324 They answered, “Into John’s baptism.
” 4Paul said, “John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in the one who would come after him, that is, in Jesus.
” 5After hearing this, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
 Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke in other tonguesa and prophesied.
 7They were about twelve men in all.
 8Then Paul visited the synagogue and spoke boldly for a period of three months, debating and presenting arguments concerning the Kingdom of God.
 6When 9But when some became hardened and disobedient, they began to speak evil of the Way in public.
 Then Paul departed from them and took the disciples apart; giving daily lectures in the schoolb of Tyrannus.
 10This continued for two years, so that all those who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.
 11God worked remarkable miracles by the hands of Paul, 12so [much] that even handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and the evil spirits were expelled.
 Jewish exorcists 13Now, some of the itinerant Jews who were exorcists took it on themselves to invoke the Name of the Lord Jesus over those who had the evil spirits.
 They said, “We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches.
” 14There were seven sons of a certain Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this.
 15However, the evil spirit answered, “Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you?” 16The man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them and overpowered them.
 He gave them such a beating that they escaped from that house naked and wounded.
 17This became known to all who lived at Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks.
 Fear fell upon them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
 18Many also of those who had believed came forward to confess and reveal their [evil] deeds.
 19Many of those who practiced magical arts brought their books and burned them in the sight of all.
 Their price was counted and found to be fifty thousand pieces of silver.
c 20In this way, the word of the Lord was growing and becoming powerful.
 a Or “languages” Or “academy” c The 50,000 pieces of silver here probably referred to 50,000 drachmas.
 If so, the value of the burned books was equivalent to about 160 man-years of wages for agricultural laborers b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ Paul’s intentions – The silversmiths in Ephesus 21Now, after these things had ended and after passing through Macedonia and Achaia, Paul firmly decided to go to Jerusalem, saying, “After going there, I must also see Rome!” 22Having sent into Macedonia two of his attendants, Timothy and Erastus, Paul stayed in Asia for a while longer.
 23About that time, there arose a serious disturbance concerning the Way.
 24A certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought much business to the craftsmen.
 25He held a meeting with craftsmen of the same occupation and said, “Men, you know that we obtain our wealth through this business.
 26As you can see and hear, not in Ephesus alone, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has convinced and turned away many people, saying that our godsa are no gods and that they are made with [human] hands.
 27Not only is there danger that our trade will lose its credit, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis whom all Asia and the world revereb will be considered as nothing, and that her majesty will be destroyed!” 28When they heard this, the craftsmenc were filled with anger and shouted, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” 29The whole city was filled with confusion.
 The people rushed with one accord into the theater and arrested Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul’s companions in travel.
 30But when Paul desired to enter in to [speak to] the people, the disciples did not allow him.
 31Some of the officials of the provinced who were his friends sent word to him and begged him not to venture into the theater.
 32Some people shouted one thing, and some another as the assembly was in turmoil.
 Most of them did not [even] know why they had come together.
 33The Jews pushed Alexander and he was brought out of the multitude.
 He motioned his hand in order to present a defense to the people, 34but when they realized that he was a Jew, they all with one voice shouted, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” And they did this for about two hours.
 35When the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he said, “Men of Ephesus, who is there who does not know that the city of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great goddess Artemis and of the image which fell down from Zeus? 36Since these things cannot be denied, you should be quiet and do nothing rash.
 37For you have brought these men here, who are neither temple-robbers nor blasphemers of your goddess.
 38If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a case against anyone, a Greek “they” Here, “reveres” is used to translate se,besqai, not proskuneo c Greek “they” d Or “Asiarchs” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 326 the courts are open, and there are proconsuls.
 Let them press charges against one another.
 39But if you seek anything about other matters, it will be settled in the lawful assembly.
 40For indeed, we are in danger of being accused concerning today’s riot since there was no reason [for it].
 Concerning it, we would not be able to give an account of this commotion.
” 41After speaking these words, he dismissed the assembly.
 20 In Greece – Troas –Eutychus falls from a window When the uproar had ended, Paul sent for the disciples.
 He then took leave of them and left for Macedonia.
 2As he traveled through those parts, he encouraged the disciples with many words and arrived into Greece.
 3After Paul had spent three months there, the Jews began to plot against him as he was about to set sail for Syria.
 He then determined to return through Macedonia.
 4The following disciples accompanied him as far as Asia: Sopater of Beroea; Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians; Gaius of Derbe; Timothy; Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia.
 5Then men went on ahead and waited for us at Troas.
 6But we sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread and five days later, we met them at Troas where we stayed for seven days.
 7On the first day of the week, when the disciples were gathered together to break bread,a Paul talked with them.
 Since he intended to depart on the next day, he continued his speech until midnight.
 8(There were many lights in the upper room where we had assembled).
 9A certain young man named Eutychus was sitting in the window, becoming drowsy.
 As Paul spoke still longer, the young man was overcome by sleep and fell down from the third floor.
 He was taken up dead.
 10But Paul went down, fell down on him and took him in his arms, saying, “Do not be distressed! His soulb is [still] in him!” 11Paul went back upstairs, broke bread, ate, and talked with them a long while, even until daybreak.
 Then, he departed.
 12The people brought the boyc [home] alive, greatly comforted.
 To Miletus – Paul’s address to the presbyters 13As for us who had gone ahead to the ship, we set sail for Assos, intending to take Paul aboard there.
 This is what Paul had arranged since he intended to go there by land.
 14When he met us at Assos, we took him aboard and headed to Mitylene.
 15The next day, we sailed from there and a Greek kla,sai a;rton Or “life” c Or “youth / young man” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ arrived opposite Chios.
 The following day, we touched at Samos and stayed at Trogyllium, and the day after we arrived in Miletus.
 16Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus in order not to spend time in Asia because he was in a hurry: if possible he wanted to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
 17From Miletus, Paul sent a message to Ephesus and called to himself the presbyters of the Church.
 18When they arrived, he told them, “You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in Asia, how I was with you all the time.
 19I served the Lord with all humility, with many tears, and with trials which happened to me by the plotting of the Jews.
 20I did not hesitate to proclaim to you anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and from house to house.
 21To both Jews and Greek, I bore witness to repentance before God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
a 22Now, behold, I go to Jerusalem bound by the Spirit.
 I do not know what will happen to me there, 23except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions await me.
 24Yet, I do not focus on these things and I do not hold my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my race with joy and [fulfill] the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to fully bear witness to the Good News of the grace of God.
 25Now, behold, I know that none of you among whom I have gone about preaching the Kingdom will ever see my face again.
 26And so, I testify to you today that I am clean from the blood of all men, 27for I did not hesitate to proclaim to you the whole counselb of God.
 28Therefore, keep watch over yourselves and over the flock among which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers! Be shepherds of the Church of God which he has purchased with the blood of his own [Son].
c 29For I know that after my departure, vicious wolves will enter in among you and they will not spare the flock.
 30From among your own group, men will arise who will speak perverse things in order to draw away the disciples after them.
 31Therefore, keep watch! Remember that for a period of three years, I did not cease night and day to warn everyone with tears.
 32Now, brethren, I entrust you to God, and to the word of his grace which is able to build up and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
 33I coveted no one’s silver, or gold, or clothing.
 34You yourselves know that these, [my] hands, served my needs and those who were with me.
 35In all things, I have given you an example, that by this kind of hard work you should support the weak and a CT omits “Christ” Or “plan / intention / purpose” c Or “with his own blood” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 328 remember the words of the Lord Jesus, as he himself said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive!’”a 36After saying these things, Paul knelt down and prayed with them all.
 were all in tears, embracing Paul and kissing him.
 38Most of all, they were sorrowful because of what he had said, that they would never see his face again.
 Then, they accompanied him to the ship.
 37They 21 In Tyre, Ptolemais and Caesarea After departing from them, we set sail and made a straight course to Cos.
 The next day, [we sailed] to Rhodes and from there to Patara.
 2Having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard and continued our journey.
 3When we arrived in sight of Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, sailed to Syria and landed at Tyre where the ship was to unload her cargo.
 4Since we found some disciples there, we stayed for seven days.
 Through the Spirit, these disciples told Paul that he should not go up to Jerusalem.
 5When our time there was completed, we departed and went on our journey.
 All the disciples, with wives and children, escorted us on our way until we were out of the city.
 Kneeling down on the beach, we prayed.
 6After saying goodbye to each other, we boarded the ship and they returned home.
 7We continued the voyage from Tyre and arrived in Ptolemais.
 There, we greeted the brethren and spent the day with them.
 8The following day, we, Paul’s companions, left and arrived in Caesarea.
 We went to the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
 9Now, this man had four virgin daughters who prophesied.
 10As we stayed there for a few days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
 11Coming to us and taking Paul’s belt, he bound his own feet and hands, and said, “Thus says the Holy Spirit: ‘Likewise, in Jerusalem, the Jews will bind the man who owns this belt and they will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.
’” 12When we heard these things, both we and the disciples who lived there begged Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
 13Then Paul answered, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? Indeed, I am ready, not only to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.
” 14Since he would not be persuaded, we became silent, except to say, “The Lord’s will be done!” a An ‘agrapha’ not found in the Gospels but preserved by oral tradition, also translated “there is more happiness in giving than in receiving” ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ Paul visits James in Jerusalem 15After these days, we took up our baggage and went up to Jerusalem.
 of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us, bringing an early disciple [named] Mnason of Cyprus, with whom we would be staying.
 16Some 17When we arrived in Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.
 18The next day, Paul went with us to visit James, and all the presbytersa were present.
 19After greeting them, Paul reported in detail what God had accomplished among the Gentiles through his ministry.
 20When they heard it, they glorified God.
 They told him, “You see, brother, that there are many thousands among the Jews who have believed, and they are all zealous for the law.
 21They have been informed about you, that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to abandon Moses and that you tell them not to circumcise their children or to preserve the customs.
 22What then? The Church must certainly meet since they will hear that you have arrived.
 23Therefore, do what we tell you.
 We have four men who have taken a vow.
 24Take them, join in their purification rites, and pay for their expenses, so that they may shave their heads.
 Then all will know that there is no truth in these reports about you, but that you yourself also live in observance of the law.
 25But concerning the Gentiles who believe, we have written our decision that they should observe no such thing,b except that they should keep themselves from food offered to idols, from blood, from strangled things, and from sexual immorality.
” 26So Paul took the men, and the next day, he purified himself and went with them into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered for every one of them.
 27When the seven days were almost completed, Jews from Asia saw Paul in the temple.
 They stirred up the entire crowd and laid hands on him, 28shouting, “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the {chosen} people, the law, and this place.
 Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple and defiled this holy place!” 29[They said this] because they had seen Trophimus, the Ephesian, with Paul in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
 Paul is arrested 30The entire city was in turmoil and the people came running.
 They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple, and at once the doors were shut.
 31As they were trying to kill him, news came up to the commanding officerc of the [Roman] troops that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.
 32Immediately, he took soldiers and centurions, and ran down to the crowd.
 When they a See Appendix A CT omits “that they should observe no such thing, except” c Technically, a tribune b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 330 saw the chief captain and the soldiers, the Jewsa stopped beating Paul.
 33Then, the commanding officer came near and arrested him.
 He gave orders that Paul should be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had done.
 34From the crowd, some shouted one thing and some another.
 Since the commander could not find out the truth because of the noise, he commanded that Paul be taken into the barracks.
 35When Paul reached the steps, he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd.
 36The whole mob followed them and shouted, “Away with him!” 37As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he asked the commanding officer, “May I speak to you?” The man said, “Do you know Greek? 38Then, are you not the Egyptian who recently stirred people up to rebellion and led the four thousand Assassins into the wilderness?” 39So Paul replied, “I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city.
b I beg you, allow me to speak to the people.
” 40Having received permission from the commander, Paul stood on the steps and motioned with his hand to the people.
 When there was a great silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrewc language, saying: 22 Paul’s defense “Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense which I now make to you.
” 2When the people heard that he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they were even more quiet.
 Paul continued, 3“I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel.
 I was instructed according to the strict tradition of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God, even as you all are this day.
 4I persecuted this Way to death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women, as 5the high priest and the entire council of the presbyters can testify.
 I even received letters for their brethren in Damascus and traveled there to bring these people in chains to Jerusalem to be punished.
 6It happened that, suddenly, as I was on my journey and approaching Damascus, at about noon, a great light shone from the skyd around me.
 7I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, a Greek “they” A roundabout reference to Rome, seemingly lost on the commander (see 22:27) c Or possibly Aramaic d Or “heaven” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ why are you persecuting me?’ 8I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ He said to me, ‘I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.
’ 9Indeed, those who were with me saw the light and were afraid, but they did not understand the voice of him who spoke to me.
 10I asked, ‘What shall I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me, ‘Arise, and go into Damascus.
 There, you will be told what you should do.
’ 11Since I could not see because of the glory of that light, I was led by the hand of those who were with me and arrived in Damascus.
 12Someone named Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well-spoken of by all the Jews, and who lived in Damascus, came to me.
 13Standing by me, he said, ‘Brother Saul, receive your sight!’ At that very moment, I was able to see him! 14He said, ‘The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth.
 15For you will be a witness for him to all people, testifying to what you have seen and heard.
 16Now why do you wait? Arise, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the Name of the Lord.
’ 17It happened that, when I had returned to Jerusalem, and while I was praying in the temple, I fell into a trance.
 18I saw the Lorda saying to me, ‘Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not receiveb testimony concerning me from you.
’ 19I said, ‘Lord, they themselves know that in every synagogue I imprisoned and beat those who believed in you.
 20When the blood of your martyrc Stephen was shed, I too was standing by, consenting to his death and guarding the coats of those who killed him.
’ 21Then he said to me, ‘Depart, for I will send you out far from here to the Gentiles.
’” 22They listened to him until he said that; then they lifted up their voice, and shouted, “Rid the earth of this fellow, for he is not fit to live!” Paul is arrested – His Roman citizenship 23As they were shouting and and throwing off their cloaks and dust into the air, 24the commanding officer ordered that Paul be brought into the barracks.
 He [then] gave instruction that Paul should be interrogated under scourging, so that he might find out for what crime the people shouted against him in such a way.
 25When they had tied him up with straps, Paul asked the centurion who stood by, “Is it lawful for you to flog a man who is a Roman [citizen] and uncondemned?” a Greek “him” Or “accept” c Or “witness” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 332 26When the centurion heard this, he went to the commanding officer and told him, “Do you realize what you are about to do? This man is a Roman [citizen]!” 27Then the commanding officer came and asked Paul, “Tell me, are you a Roman?” Paul replied, “Yes!” 28The commanding officer answered, “I bought my citizenship for a great price!” “But I was born a Roman,” Paul replied.
 29Immediately those who were about to interrogate him left him, and even the commanding officer was afraid when he realized that he had bound Paul, a Roman [citizen], in chains.
 30But on the next day, desiring to know the truth about why Paula was accused by the Jews, the officerb freed him from the bonds and commanded the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to come together.
 He then brought Paul down and set him before them.
 23 Paul before the Sanhedrin Looking straight at the Sanhedrin, Paul said, “Brothers, I have lived before God in all good conscience until this day.
” 2Then Ananias, the high priest, ordered those who stood by him to strike Paul on the mouth.
 3At this, Paul said to him, “God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, and [yet] command me to be struck contrary to the law?” 4Those who stood by said, “Do you insult God’s high priest?” 5Paul said, “I did not know, brothers, that he was high priest.
 For it is written, ‘You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.
’”c 6But when Paul realized that some were Sadducees and the others Pharisees, he cried out in the council, “Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees! And I am being judged concerning the hope and resurrection of the dead!” 7When he said this, an argument arose between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
 8(For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, angel, or spirit; but the Pharisees believe in all of these things).
 9A great uproar began, and some of the teachers of the law who belonged to the party of the Pharisees stood up.
 They strongly a Greek “he” Greek “he” c Exodus 22:28 b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ argued, “We find no evil in this man! But if a spirit or angela has spoken to him, let us not fight against God!” 10The dispute became so fierce that the commanding officer feared that they would tear Paul to pieces.
 He then ordered the soldiers to go down and remove Paul from the assembly by force, and to bring him into the barracks.
 11The following night, the Lord stood by him, and said, “Rejoice, Paul! As you have borne witness to me at Jerusalem, you must also bear witness in Rome.
” Conspiracy exposed – Paul is taken to Caesarea 12When day came, some of the Jews banded together and bound themselves under a great curse,b saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
 13There were more than forty people who joined this conspiracy.
 14They came to the chief priests and the presbyters, and said, “We have bound ourselves under a great curse, to eat nothing until we have killed Paul.
 15Now then, you with the Sanhedrin should petition the commanding officer to bring him down to you tomorrow, as though you were going to judge his case more exactly.
 We are ready to kill him before he comes near!” 16But Paul’s nephewc heard of their ambush.
 He came, entered into the fortress and told Paul.
 17Calling one of the centurions, Paul said, “Bring this young man to the commanding officer.
 He has something to tell him.
” 18Accordingly, the centurion took Paul’s nephewd and brought him to the commanding officer, saying, “Paul, the prisoner, called me and asked me to bring this young man to you.
 He has something to tell you.
” 19The commanding officer took Paul’s nephew by the hand, and going aside, asked him privately, “What is it that you have to tell me?” 20He replied, “The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow, as though intending to inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him.
 21But to not give in to their request, for more than forty men lie in wait for Paul, and they have bound themselves under a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him.
 They are ready now, waiting for you to grant their request.
” 22And so, the commanding officer let the young man go with this instruction, “Tell no one that you have revealed these things to me.
” 23He a CT omits “let us not fight against God” Or “oath” c Literally “sister’s son” d Greek “him” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 334 called to himself two of the centurions, and said, “Prepare two hundred soldiers to leave at the third hour of the nighta for Caesarea, along with seventy horsemen, and two hundred men armed with spears.
” 24He asked them to provide animals in order set Paul on one, and to bring him safely to Felix the governor.
 25He wrote a letter like this: 26“Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix: Greetings! 27This man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be killed by them, when I came with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman [citizen].
 28Desiring to know why they accused him, I brought him to their council.
 29I found him to be accused about questions of their law, but not to be charged with anything worthy of death or imprisonment.
 30When I was told that the Jews were about to ambush this man, I immediately sent him to you.
 I also instructed his accusers to bring their accusations against him before you.
 Farewell.
” 31And so, the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris.
 32But on the next day, they left the horsemen to continue with him and returned to the barracks.
 33When the horsemenb arrived in Caesarea, they delivered the letter to the governor and also presented Paul to him.
 34After reading the letter, the governor asked what province Paul was from.
 Having learned that he was from Cilicia, he said, 35“I will hear you fully when your accusers also arrive.
” He then commanded that Paul should be held in Herod’s palace.
 24 Paul before Felix Five days later, the high priest, Ananias, came down with a group of presbyters and a professional speakerc named Tertullus, and they informed the governor of their charges against Paul.
 2Paul was then called in and Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, “We have enjoyed much peace under you, and we see that excellent reforms are being carried out for this nation.
 3Most Excellent Felix, we acknowledge this always and everywhere, with utmost gratitude.
 4But, that I may not delay you, I entreat you to bear with us and hear a few words.
 5As it is, we have found this man to be a plague, an instigator of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.
 6He even tried to profane the temple, and we arrested him, ddesiring to judge a About 9:00 pm Greek “they” c Or “orator” d CT omits the second clause of verse 6 b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ him according to our own laws.
 7aHowever, the commanding officer, Lysias, arrived and with much violence took him out of our hands, 8commanding his accusers to come to you.
 By examining him yourself, you will be able to verify for yourself the truth of our accusations.
” 9The Jews also joined in the deposition, affirming that these things were true.
 10When the governor had motioned for him to speak, Paul answered, “Because I know that you have been a judge of this nation for many years, I gladly make my defense.
 11As you can see, it has been no more than twelve days since I went up to express adorationb at Jerusalem.
 12In the temple, they did not find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the synagogues, or in the city.
 13Moreover, they cannot prove to you the accusations they are making against me now.
 14However, I do admit this to you, that after the Way which they call a sect, so do I offer divine service to the God of our fathers.
 I believe all things which are according to the law and which are written in the prophets.
 15I have the same hope in God as these men, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both upright and wicked.
 16And so, I strive to always have a conscience without offense toward God and men.
 17A few years later, I came to bring to my people gifts for the needy, and to present offerings.
 18This is how certain Jews from Asia found me in the temple, ritually purified, with no mob or turmoil.
 But there are some Jews from Asia 19who should have been here before you to present their accusations if they had anything against me.
 20Otherwise, let these men explain what injustice they found in me when I stood before the Sanhedrin.
 21Or perhaps it is for what I cried out while standing among them, ‘I am being judged before you today regarding the resurrection of the dead!’” 22But Felix, being better informed concerning the Way, adjourned the case, stating, “When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will decide your case.
” Paul’s years in Caesarea 23He ordered the centurion that Paul should be kept in custody and that he should have some privileges: none of his friends should be forbidden from serving him or visiting him.
 24A few days later, Felix came with his wife Drusilla who was Jewish.
 He sent for Paul and granted him a hearing concerning the faith in Christ Jesus.
 25As Paul discoursed about righteousness, self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix became alarmed and said, “Go your way for this time.
 When it is convenient for me, I will summon you [again].
” 26Meanwhile, he also hoped that Paul a b CT omits verse 7 and the first part of verse 8 until the end of the sentence proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 336 would offer him money for his release.
 For this reason too, he sent for him more often and discussed with him.
 27But after two years had elapsed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favor with the Jews, Felix left Paul imprisoned.
 25 Paul appeals to Caesar Three days after arriving in the province, Festus went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
 2Then the high priest and the leaders of the Jewish people presented to him an [accusatory] report against Paul.
 They begged him 3and asked for his support against Paul, asking that he would transfer the prisonera [back] to Jerusalem, plotting to kill him on the way.
 4However, Festus replied that Paul would be kept in custody at Caesarea, and that he himself would leave shortly.
 5He said, “Those who have authority among you should go down with me! And if the man has done anything wrong, let them accuse him.
” 6Having stayed among them more than ten days, Festus returnedb to Caesarea.
 The following day, he sat on the judgment seat and ordered that Paul be brought in.
 7When Paul arrived, the Jews who had traveled from Jerusalem stood around him and hurled against him many grave accusations which they could not prove.
 8Paul then said in his [own] defense, “I have not sinned in any way, against the law of the Jews, or against the temple, or against Caesar!” 9Then, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, Festus asked Paul, “Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem in order to be judged by me there concerning these matters?” 10But Paul replied, “I am standing before Caesar’s judgment seat, where I should be tried.
 I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well.
 11Now, if I have done wrong and committed anything worthy of death, I do not refuse to die! But if none of those things they accuse me of are true, then no one can hand me over to them.
 I appeal to Caesar!” 12At this, and after conferring with his advisers, Festus answered, “You have appealed to Caesar.
 To Caesar you shall go!” Paul before King Agrippa 13A few days later, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived in Caesarea and greeted Festus.
 14Since Agrippa was spending some time there, Festus presented Paul’s case before the king, saying, “There is a certain man who a b Greek “him” Or “went down” ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ was left as a prisoner by Felix.
 15When I was in Jerusalem, the chief priests and the presbyters of the Jews presented an [accusatory] report about this man, asking me to condemn him.
 16I answered them that it is not the custom of the Romans to condemn anyone to deatha before the accused has met his accusers face to face and has had opportunity to make his defense in the case against him.
 17Then, since they had come together here, I did not delay.
 On the following day, I sat on the judgment seat and commanded the man to be brought in.
 18When the accusers stood up, they did not bring any of the charges I was expecting.
 19Instead, they had some dispute against him dealing with their own religion, and about a certain Jesus who was dead, and who Paul affirms to be alive.
 20I was puzzled as how to investigate such things and asked whether he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there be judged concerning these matters.
 21But Paul appealed that his case be reserved for the decision of the emperor, and so I gave orders that he be detained until I could send him to Caesar.
” 22Agrippa said to Festus, “I too would like to hear this man!” “Tomorrow,” Festus replied, “you shall hear him.
” 23On the next day, after Agrippa and Bernice had made their entry with great pomp, they went to the place of hearing with the commanding officers and the leaders of the city.
 At the command of Festus, Paul was brought in.
 24Festus said, “King Agrippa, and all who are here present with us, you see this man.
 The entire Jewish community, both in Jerusalem and here, petitioned me about him, clamoring that he should not live any longer.
 25But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and as he himself had appealed to his Imperial Majesty, I decided to send him {to Rome}.
 26I have nothing certain to write to my lord concerning this man! Therefore, I have brought him forth before you [all], and especially before you, King Agrippa, so that after examination, I may have something to write.
 27For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner without also specifying the charges against him.
” 26 Agrippa said to Paul, “You may speak for yourself.
” Then Paul held up his hand and made his defense.
 2“I consider myself blessed, King Agrippa, that today, I am able to make my defense before you in response to all the accusations of the Jews, 3especially because you are an expert in all the customs and debates which take place among the Jews.
 Therefore, I beg you to hear me patiently.
 a Or “destruction” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 338 4Indeed, all the Jews know about my way of life from my youth up, which was from the beginning among my own nation and in Jerusalem.
 5Since they have known me from the beginning, they could testify that I lived as a Pharisee according to the strictest sect of our religion.
 6And now, I stand here on trial because of the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers! 7This is what our twelve tribes hope to attain as they constantly offer divine servicea night and day.
 It is concerning this hope that I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa! 8Why is it judged incredible that God raises the dead? 9As for myself, I certainly thought that it was my duty to oppose the Name of Jesus of Nazareth.
 10I also did this in Jerusalem: having received authority from the chief priests, I had many of the saints imprisoned, and when they were put to death, I cast my vote against them.
 11Often I went to all the synagogues to have them punished and I tried to make them blaspheme.
 Filled with rage against them, I even persecuted them in foreign cities.
 12Then, as I was traveling to Damascus with the authority and commission from the chief priests, 13at noon, O king, I saw on the way a light from the sky.
b It was brighter than the sun and shone around me and those who were traveling with me.
 14We all fell to the ground, and I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrewc language, ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads!’ 15I asked, ‘Who are you, Lord?’d He replied, ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting! 16Now arise and stand on your feet, for I have appeared to you for this purpose: to appoint you as a servant and a witness both of what you have seen and of what I will reveal to you.
 17I will rescue you from the [Jewish] people and from the Gentiles.
 I am sending you to them 18to open their eyes, so that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, and receive remission of sins as well as an inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in me.
’ 19Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.
 20I first proclaimed this to the people of Damascus, Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea.
 Then, I also proclaimed it to the Gentiles; that they should repent, turn to God, and do works worthy of [their] repentance.
 21For this reason, the Jews arrested me in the temple and tried to kill me.
 22Yet, having obtained God’s help, I stand to this day and bear a Greek latreu/on Or “heaven” c Or “Aramaic” d Or “Sir” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ witness to small and great alike.
 I only say what the prophets and Moses said would happen, 23how the Christ was {destined} to suffer, and how, by the resurrection of the dead, he would be first to proclaim light both to the [Jewish] people and to the Gentiles.
” 24As Paul was presenting this defense, Festus exclaimed with a loud voice, “Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is driving you insane!” 25But Paul replied, “I am not crazy, Most Excellent Festus, but boldly declare words of truth and good sense.
 26Indeed, the king is aware of these things and I will also speak freely to him.
 For I am convinced that none of this is hidden from him, for this has not been done in a corner.
 27King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe!” 28Agrippa then said to Paul, “With a little persuasion, are you trying to make me a Christian?” 29Paul answered, “I pray to God, that whether with little or with much, not only you but also all who hear me today might become as I am, except for these chains.
” 30The king rose up with the governor, along with Bernice and those who sat with them.
 31After retiring, they talked together and agreed, “This man has done nothing worthy of death or imprisonment.
” 32Agrippa said to Festus, “This man might have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.
” 27 Paul is sent to Rome – Shipwrecked in Malta When it was determined that we should sail for Italy, the authoritiesa delivered Paul and other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the Imperial regiment.
 2We boarded a ship from Adramyttium which was about to sail to various places on the coast of Asia and put to sea.
 Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, traveled with us.
 3The next day, we landed at Sidon.
 Julius treated Paul with kindness and gave him permission to visit his friends and to be cared for.
 4Putting to sea from there, we sailed under [the shelter of] Cyprus because the winds were contrary.
 5After sailing across the open sea off [the coasts of] Cilicia and Pamphylia, we arrived in Myra,b a city of Lycia.
 6There, the centurion found a ship sailing from Alexandria to Italy, and he put us on board.
 7After sailing slowly for many days, we arrived with difficulty near Cnidus.
 The wind did not allow us to go further [on course], and we sailed under a b Greek “they” This city would later become the see of St.
 Nicholas THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 340 the shelter of Crete, off Salmone.
 8We continued along the coast and arrived at a place called ‘Fair Havens,’ near the city of Lasea.
 9A great deal of time had been lost and the voyage was now dangerous because they were already being rationed with food.
a Paul gave them this warning: 10“Sirs, I perceive that the voyage will result in injuries and much loss, not only of the cargo and ship, but also of our lives!” 11However, the centurion gave more heed to the master and to the owner of the ship than to what Paul was saying.
 12Since the haven was not suitable to spend the winter, the majority was in favor of continuing and to do our utmost to reach Phoenix and winter there.
 This is a port of Crete which faces both the northeast and the southeast.
 13When the south wind began to blow softly, they thought that their goal was within reach.
 Having lifted the anchor, they sailed along [the coast of] Crete, close to shore.
 14But before long, a violent wind called ‘the northeasternb’ rushed down from the island!c 15The ship was caught and could not face the wind.
 We had to yield to the wind and the ship was driven along.
 16Sailing under the shelter of a small island called Clauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the lifeboat.
 17After the crew had hoisted it up, they used it to help reinforce the ship.
 Fearing that they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars, they lowered the sea anchor and let the ship drift along.
 18We were so battered by the storm that the next day, the men began to throw things overboard.
 19On the third day, they threw out the ship’s tackle with their own hands.
 20When neither sun nor stars had shone on us for many days, and with a major storm pressing on us, all hope that we would be saved was now taken away.
 21As the men had been for a long time without food, Paul stood up among them and said, “Sirs, you should have listened to me and not have set sail from Crete; then you would have avoided this injury and loss.
 22Now, I encourage you to keep your courage, for there will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship.
 23For last night, an angel of the God to whom I belong and to whom I offer divine serviced stood by me.
 24He said: ‘Do not be afraid, Paul! You must stand before Caesar.
 Behold, God has granted you [the life] all those who sail with you.
’ 25Therefore, sirs, be of good cheer! For I believe God, that it will be just as it has been spoken to me.
 26However, we must run aground on some island.
” 27On the fourteenth night, at about midnight, as we were driven back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, the sailors surmised that they were approaching a Or “the Fast was now already passed” Or literally, “Euroclydon” c Or, “a northeaster” d Greek latreu,w b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ some land.
 28They measured the depth of water and found twenty fathoms.
a A little while later, they took soundings again and found fifteen fathoms.
b 29Fearing that we would run aground on rocky ground, they let down four anchors from the stern, hoping to hold steady until daylight.
 30Trying to escape from the ship, sailors lowered the lifeboat into the sea, pretending that they would lay out anchors from the bow.
 31Paul then said to the centurion and to the soldiers, “Unless these men stay in the ship, you cannot be saved!” 32So the soldiers cut away the ropes of the lifeboat and let it fall off.
 33As the day was coming on, Paul begged them all to take some food, saying, “This day is the fourteenth day that you wait and continue fasting, taking nothing.
 34Now, I urge you to take some food! This is for your safety, and not a hair will perish from any of your heads.
” 35After saying this and having taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all.
 Then he broke it and began to eat.
 36At this, they all cheered up and also took food.
 37In all, we were two hundred seventy-six souls on the ship.
 38When they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship by throwing out the wheat into the sea.
 39When day came, they did not recognize the land but noticed a cove with a beach, and they decided to try to drive the ship onto it.
 40Casting off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time untying the rudder ropes.
 Hoisting up the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.
 41But coming to a place with cross-currents,c they beached the vessel.
 The front of the ship struck and remained immovable while the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves.
 42The soldiers’ advice was to kill the prisoners, so that none of them would swim out and escape.
 43But the centurion, desiring to save Paul, kept them from carrying out their plan.
 He gave orders that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first and go to shore.
 44The rest should follow, some on planks, and some on other things from the ship.
 And so it was that they all escaped safely to the land.
 28 In Malta – Paul bitten by a snake Once safe on the shore, we learned that the island was called Malta.
 2The natives showed us unusual kindness; they kindled a fire and welcomed us all because it was raining and cold.
 3But as Paul was gathering a bundle of sticks and placing them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened itself on his hand.
 4When the natives saw the creature a 20 fathoms = 120 feet = 36.
6 meters 15 fathoms = 90 feet = 27.
4 meters c That is, a sand bar b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 342 hanging from his hand, they said one to another, “There is no doubt that this man is a murderer! He has escaped from the sea but Justice has not allowed him to live.
” 5However, Paul shook off the creature into the fire and remained unharmed 6Nevertheless, they expected that he would have swollen or suddenly fallen down dead.
 After watching for a long time and seeing nothing bad happen to him, they changed their minds and said that he was a god! 7Now, in the vicinity of that place were lands belonging to the leader of the island, [a man] named Publius who welcomed us and courteously hosted us for three days.
 8It also happened that Publius’ father was bedridden, sick with fever and dysentery.
 Paul went to see him, prayed, and laying his hands on him, healed him.
 9After this had taken place, the rest of the people who had diseases in the island also came, and they were cured.
 10They honored us in many ways, and when we sailed off, put on board the things that we needed.
 11Three months later, we set sail in a ship from Alexandria which had wintered in the island, whose figurehead was “The Twin Brothers.
”a 12Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there for three days.
 13From there, we circled around [the coastline of Sicily] and arrived at Rhegium.
 The following day, a south wind sprang up and on the second day, we arrived in Puteoli.
 14There, we found brethren who entreated us to stay with them for seven days.
 And so, we approached Rome.
 Arrival in Rome 15From there, having heard of us, the brethren came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns.
 When Paul saw them, he thanked God and took courage.
 16When we reached Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard,b but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him.
 17Three days later, Paul called together those who were the leaders of the Jews.
 When they had assembled, he said to them, “Brothers, although I have done nothing against the people or the customs of our fathers,c I was delivered as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
 18After putting me on trial, the Romans wanted to release me because there was no grounds to put me to death.
 19But when the Jews spoke against it, I was forced to appeal to Caesar, not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation.
 20For this reason, therefore, I asked to see you and to speak with you, for it is because of the hope of Israel that I am bound with this chain.
” a The Greek Dioskou,roij refers to the twin gods Castor and Pollux CT omits “the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but” c Or “ancestors / forefathers” b ACTS OF THE APOSTLES - ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΟΣΤΟΛΩΝ 21They answered him, “We have not received letters from Judea concerning you, and no brother has come here to make a report or speak any evil of you.
 22But we desire to hear from you what you think because it is known to us that everywhere, people speak against this sect.
” 23After making an appointment with Paul for a certain day, many more people visited him at his place of residence.
 From morning until evening, he explained and bore witness about [the things of] the Kingdom of God.
 He also tried to convince the Jewsa concerning Jesus, [quoting] both from the law of Moses and from the prophets.
 24Some believed what was spoken, and others did not.
 25Although disagreeing among themselves, they left after Paul had spoken one [last] word, “Rightly did the Holy Spirit speak to our fathers through Isaias (Isaiah) the prophet, 26saying: ‘Go to this people and say: You will keep on hearing but never understand! You will keep on seeing but never perceive! For this people’s heart has grown callous, Their ears are dull of hearing, And they have closed their eyes, For fear that should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, Understand with their heart, and would repent, And I would heal them.
’b 28Therefore, you should know that God’s salvation is sent to the nations; they will listen!” 29After Paul said these words, the Jews departed with a great dispute among themselves.
c 30So Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house, receiving everyone who came to visit him.
 31With all boldness and without hindrance, he proclaimed the Kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus Christ.
 a Greek “them” Isaias (Isaiah) 6:9-10 c CT omits this verse.
 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 344 INTRODUCTION TO THE PAULINE EPISTLES AUTHORSHIP AND DATES Orthodox tradition affirms the Pauline authorship of all the letters and writings ascribed to the great missionary apostle.
 It also recognizes that Paul worked with an amanuensis or secretary, a fact which accounts for variations in style.
 Hebrews is also considered Pauline in the sense that it is directly connected with the apostle, although it is acknowledged that others (Luke, Sylvanus, Clement, Barnabas and Apollos have been suggested) were involved in the writing of this epistle which has a unique place in the Pauline corpus.
 Origen’s views on this matter are certainly as reliable as those of modern scholars: Everyone who is able to discern differences of style will admit that the character of the diction of the epistle entitled To the Hebrews has not the apostle’s roughness in speech, who confessed himself unpolished in speech, that is, in style, but that the epistle is better Greek in the framing of its diction.
 On the other hand, that the thoughts of the epistle are admirable, and not inferior to the acknowledged writings of the apostle, to this also everyone will consent as true who has given attention to reading the apostle.
 As for myself, if I were to state my own opinion, I should say that the thoughts are the apostle’s, but that the style and composition belonged to one who called to mind the apostle’s teachings and, as it were, made short notes of what his master said.
 If any Church, therefore, holds this epistle as Paul’s, let it be commended for this also.
 For not without reason have the men of old handed it down as Paul’s.
 But who wrote the epistle, in truth, [only] God knows.
 Yet the account which has reached us [is twofold], some saying that Clement, who was bishop of the Romans, wrote the epistle, others, that it was Luke, he who wrote the Gospel and the Acts.
 (Origen quoted by Eusebius – Ecclesiastical History, 6.
25) At the same time, Origen always publicly ascribed Hebrews to Saint Paul,a which is also the position and liturgical practice of Eastern Orthodoxy in this matter.
 The chart below presents an outline of Paul’s life with possible dates and other items added.
 The date and place where the Epistles were written are a De Principiis 1, 2.
7.
7, 3.
2.
4, 2.
3.
5, 4.
1.
13, 4.
1.
24, Against Celsus 3.
52, 7.
29, To Africanus 9 INTRODUCTION TO THE PAULINE EPISTLES given here as approximations and indicated by the bold letter titles, e.
g.
, ROMANS.
 mid - late 33 Pauline Letters Acts Conversion near Damascus (implied in Gal 1.
17c) Damascus (9.
1-22) To Arabia (Gal 1.
17b) Return to Damascus (1.
17c): 3 yrs.
 late 36 Flight from Damascus (2Cor 11.
3233) Flight from Damascus (9.
23-25) To Jerusalem (Gal 1.
18-20) To Jerusalem (9.
26-29) "The regions of Syria and Cilicia" (Gal 1.
21-22) Caesarea and Tarsus (9.
30) Antioch (11.
26a) (Jerusalem [11.
29-30; 12.
25]) Mission I: Antioch (13.
1-4) Seleucia, Salamis, Cyprus (13.
4b12) mid 37 Churches evangelized before Macedonian Philippi (Php 4.
15) South Galatia (13.
13-15.
25) Antioch (14.
26-28) spr 51 "Once again during 14 years I went up to Jerusalem (for "Council," Gal 2.
1) Jerusalem (15.
1-2) Antioch Incident (Gal 2.
11-14) Antioch (15.
35); Mission II Syria and Cilicia (15.
41) South Galatia (16.
1-5) THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT sum 51 Pauline Letters Acts Galatia (1Cor 16.
1) evangelized for the first time (Gal 4.
13) Phrygia and North Galatia (16.
6) 346 Mysia and Troas (16.
7-10) aut 51 Philippi (1Th 2.
2 [=Macedonia, 2Cor 11.
9]) Philippi (16.
11-40) Thessalonica (1Th 2.
2; cf.
 3.
6; Php 4.
15-16) Amphipolis, Apollonia, Thessalonica (17.
1-9) Beroea (17.
10-14) early 52 Athens (1Th 3.
1; cf.
 2.
17-18) Athens (17.
15-34) early 52spr 53 Corinth evangelized (cf.
 1Cor 1.
19; 11.
7-9) Corinth for 18 months (18.
1-18a) 1 & 2 THESSALONIANS Timothy arrives in Corinth (1Th 3.
6), probably accompanied by Silvanus (1Th 1.
1) Silas and Timothy come from Macedonia (18.
5) Paul leaves from Cenchreae (18.
18b) spr 53 1 CORINTHIANS Leaves Priscilla and Aquila at Ephesus (18.
19-21) Apollos (in Ephesus) urged by Paul to go to Corinth (1Cor 16.
12) Apollos dispatched to Achaia by Priscilla and Aquila (18.
17) Paul to Caesarea Maritima (18.
22a) Paul to Jerusalem (18.
22b) In Antioch for a certain amount of time (18.
22c) aut 53 sum 56 Northern Galatia, second visit (Gal 4.
13) Mission III: North Galatia and Phrygia (18.
23) Ephesus (1Cor 16.
1-8) Ephesus for 3 yrs or 2 yrs, 3 mos (19.
1-20; cf.
 20.
31) GALATIANS, 2 CORINTHIANS Visit of Chloe, Stephanas, et al.
 to Paul in Ephesus (1Cor 1.
11; 16.
17), bringing letter (7.
1) INTRODUCTION TO THE PAULINE EPISTLES Pauline Letters Acts Paul imprisoned (? cf.
 1Cor 15.
32; 2Cor 1.
8) Timothy sent to Corinth (1Cor 4.
17; 16.
10) Paul’s 2nd "painful" visit to Corinth (2Cor 13.
2); return to Ephesus Titus sent to Corinth with letter "written in tears" (2Cor 2.
13) (Paul’s plans to visit Macedonia, Corinth, and Jerusalem/Judea, 1Cor 16.
3-8; cf.
 2Cor 1.
15-16) (Paul’s plans to visit Macedonia, Achaia, Jerusalem, Rome, 19.
21) Ministry in Troas (2Cor 2.
12) To Macedonia (2Cor 2.
13; 7.
5; 9.
2b-4); arrival of Titus (2Cor 7.
6) Macedonia (20.
1b) Titus sent on ahead to Corinth (2Cor 7.
16-17), with part of 2Cor Illyricum (Rom 15.
19)? late 56 early 57 Achaia (Rom 15.
26; 16.
1); Paul’s third visit to Corinth (2Cor 13.
1) 3 mos.
 in Greece (Achaia) (20.
2-3) ROMANS Paul starts to return to Syria (20.
3), but goes via Macedonia and Philippi (20.
3b-6a) Passover 57 Troas (20.
6b) Miletus (20.
15c-38) Tyre, Ptolemais, Caesarea (21.
7-14) Pentecost 57 (Plans to visit Jerusalem, Rome, Spain [Rom 15.
22-27]) Jerusalem (21.
15-23.
30) sum 57 sum 59 Caesarea (23.
31-26.
32) sum 59 early 60 Journey to Rome (27.
1-28.
14) THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT Pauline Letters 348 Acts spr 60 spr 62 Rome (28.
15-31) EPHESIANS, PHILIPPIANS, COLOSSIANS, PHILEMON spr 62 Release from Roman imprisonment (28.
30) spr 62? Possible trip to Spain (Rom 15.
24, 28) sum 62? Crete (Tit 1.
5) late 62? Ephesus (2Tim 4.
9-19) early 63? Miletus (2Tim 4.
20) Troas (2Tim 4.
13) wint 63? Greece; winter in Nicopolis (Tit 3.
12; 1Tim 1.
3) 1 TIMOTHY, TITUS Corinth (2Tim 4.
20) sum 64? Rome (2Tim 1.
17) late 64? (Death in Rome [2Tim 4.
6-8]) 2 TIMOTHY In particular, the dates and order of travel after Paul’s release from Rome in spring 62 are conjectures based on a few hints left to us in the Pastoral Epistles, and a mention of an intended trip to Spain in Romans.
 Paul was apparently released under favorable circumstances in 62.
 Had his imprisonment then ended in martyrdom, it would surely have been depicted in Acts, as was Stephen’s martyrdom (Acts 6:1-8:1).
 The date for Paul’s death given here, late 64-66, presents this event as part of Nero’s persecution of Christians following the great fire of Rome which began in June 64.
 The apostle was apparently remembered, arrested, brought to Rome, tried, and executed.
 Paul’s expectation of his coming martyrdom is stirringly preserved in 2 Timothy 4:6-8.
 With the above chronological framework in place, it is also possible to present tentative dates for the foundations of various Churches, for the conversions of persons to whom Paul wrote, as well as the dates at which the various letters were written.
 INTRODUCTION TO THE PAULINE EPISTLES Eschatological and personal hope (1 Corinthians, Thessalonians)  The Church as Body of Christ and “pillar and foundation of truth” (Ephesians, Pastoral Epistles) THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 350 Hebrews explores three majors themes:  Christ, “better” mediator of a better new covenant  Christ the Great High Priest; a better, perfect and unique sacrifice  Endurance in faith and the danger of fallings away from salvation TRANSLATION NOTE FOR ROMANS In this complex theological masterpiece, St.
 Paul often used the Greek word ga.
r to indicate a certain logical continuity.
 This word is typically rendered by ‘for’ in traditional translations, but such a consistent approach quickly becomes awkward and burdensome.
 For this reason, the EOB uses a variety of English equivalent for ga.
r, such as ‘indeed,’ ‘as it is,’ ‘certainly,’ ‘for,’ etc.
 TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ ROMANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ) 1 Greetings Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart for the Good News of God, 2which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the Holy Scriptures.
 3[This is the Good News] concerning his Son, who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh, 4who was declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord.
 5Through him, we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience of faith among all the nations, for his Name’s sake.
 6Among them, you are also called to belong to Jesus Christ.
 7To all who are in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
 8First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, that your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world.
 9For God, to whom I offer divine servicea in my spirit in the Good News of his Son, is my witness; how unceasingly I always make mention of you in my prayers.
 10I request, if by any means now at last I may be blessed by the will of God to come to you.
 11For I long to see you, so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift with the purpose that you may be established;b 12that is, that I with you may be encouraged in you, each of us by the other’s faith, both yours and mine.
 The wrath of God – Idolatry and immorality 13Now, I do not desire to have you unaware, brethren, that I have often planned to come to you, but so far, I have been hindered.
 [My goal] is that I might have some fruit among you also, even as I have among the rest of the Gentiles.
 14I am debtor both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to the wise and to the foolish.
 15This is why there is so much eagerness on my part to preach the Good News to you also who are in Rome.
 a b Greek latreu,w Or “made more solid” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 352 16Indeed, I am not ashamed of the Good News of Christ!a It is the power of God for salvation for everyone who believes, for the Jew first, and also for the Greek.
 17For in the Gospelb God’s righteousness is revealed from faith to faith.
 As it is written, “But the righteous shall live by faith.
”c 18However, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of those who suppress the truth in unrighteousness, 19because what is known of God is revealed in them, for God revealed it to them.
 20For since the creation of the world, his invisible things are clearly seen.
 They are perceived through created things, even his everlasting power and divinity.
 This is so that they may be without excuse, 21because knowing God, they did not glorify him as God or give [him] thanks.
 Instead, they became vain in their reasoning, and their senseless heart was darkened.
 22Thinking themselves to be wise, they became fools! 23They exchanged the glory of the incorruptible God for the likeness of an image of corruptible man, of birds, of four-footed animals, and creeping things.
d 24Therefore, God also gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to impurity, so that their bodies should be dishonored among themselves.
 25Having exchanged the truth of God for a lie, they exaltede and offered divine servicef to the creature rather than the Creator who is blessed forever.
 Amen.
 26For this reason, God gave them up to vile passions: their women changed the natural function into what is against nature 27and the men did likewise.
 They abandoned the natural function of the woman and burned in their lust toward one another, men doing what is inappropriate with men, and receiving in themselves the due penalty of their error.
 28Even as they refused to have God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a worthlessg mind, to do those things which are not fitting.
 29They have become filled with all [kinds of] unrighteousness, sexual immorality, wickedness, covetousness, and malice.
 They are also full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and evil habits.
 [They are] secret slanderers, 30backbiters, hateful of God, insolent, haughty, boastful, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, 31without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, unforgiving, and unmerciful.
 32Knowing the ordinance of God, (that those who practice such things are worthy of death), they not only do these [very] things but also approve of those who practice them.
 a CT omits “of Christ” Greek “it,” or “Good News” c Habakkuk 2:4 d The 1560 Geneva Bible and the 1611 Authorized Version associate Wisdom 12:24 with Romans 1:23 in a marginal reference (compare Romans 1:20-32 with Wisdom 13-15).
 e Here, “to exalt” or “to worship” is used to translate se,besqai, not prokuneo f Greek evla,treusan g Or “reprobate (KJV) / debased (NRS) / depraved (NIV) / undiscerning (NAB)” b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ 2 The judgment of God Therefore, you are without excuse, if you are judging! For in passing judgment on another, you condemn yourself, because you pass judgment and yet practice the same things.
 2We know that the judgment of God is according to truth and against those who practice such things.
 3Do you think that you will escape the judgment of God if you judge those who practice such things and yet act the same? 4Or do you despise the riches of God’sa goodness, tolerance, and patience, not knowing that his goodness leads you to repentance? 5But according to your hardness and unrepentant heart, you are storing up for yourself wrath in the day of wrath, revelation, and of the righteous judgment of God.
 6He “will pay back to everyone according to their works;”b 7[which is] eternal life to those who by perseverance in good works seek glory, honor, and incorruptibility.
 8However, to those who are self-seeking and do not obey the truth but unrighteousness, there will be retribution and intense wrath, 9oppression and anguish.
 Trouble and distress will come to everyone who does evil, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
 10On the other hand, glory, honor, and peace [are] for everyone who does good; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek, 11because there is no partialityc with God.
 12Hence, all those who have sinned apart from the law will also perish without the law, [and] as many as have sinned under the law will be judged by the law.
 13For it is not the hearers of the law who are righteous before God, but the doers of the law will be declared righteous.
d 14(Indeed, when Gentiles who do not have the law do by nature the things of the law, they are a law to themselves, even though they do not have the law, 15by showing that the practical expressione of the law is written in their hearts.
 Their conscience bears witness, and their thoughts alternately accuse or defendf them).
 16This is for the day when, according to my [proclamation of the] gospel,g God, through Jesus Christ, will judge the secret thoughts of all.
 17Indeed, you [who] bear the name of Jew, you rely on the law and glory in God.
 18You know his will, and approve the things that are excellent, being instructed out of the law.
 19You are confident that you yourself are a guide a Greek “his” Psalms 62:12 / 61 LXX; Proverbs 24:12 c Or “prejudice / unfair judgment” d Or “justified” e Or “work, requirement, effect” (Greek to.
 e;rgon tou/ no,mou grapto.
n evn tai/j kardi,aij auvtw/n) f Greek avpologoume,nwn from which the English “apologize” is derived g Or “Good News” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 354 of the blind, a light to those who are in darkness, 20a corrector of the foolish and a teacher of infants, having in the law the form of knowledge and of the truth.
 21You therefore who teach another, [why] do you not teach yourself? You who preach that one should not steal, [why] do you steal? 22You who say that a man should not commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples? 23You who glory in the law by your disobedience of the law, [why] do you dishonor God? 24For “the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you,”a just as it is written.
 About circumcision 25Indeed, circumcision gains something if you are a doer of the law, but if you are a transgressor of the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
 26And so, if an uncircumcised man keeps the ordinances of the law, will not his uncircumcision be accounted as circumcision? 27Will not the uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfills the law, judge you, who with the letter and circumcision are a transgressor of the law? 28For one is not a Jew by being so outwardly, neither is that circumcision [true circumcision] which is outward in the flesh.
 29Instead, someone is a Jew by being one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit and not in the letter.
 Truly, their praise is not from human beings but from God.
 3 Objections and answers – The domination of sin And so, what advantage does the Jew have? Or what is the benefit of circumcision? 2Much in every way! First of all, the Jewsb were entrusted with the oracles of God! 3But what if some were without faith? Will their lack of faith nullify the faithfulness of God? 4May it never be! Yes, let God be found true, but every man a liar.
 As it is written, That you might be justified in your words,c and might prevail when you come into judgment.
d 5But if our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God, what will we say? Is God unrighteous if he inflicts wrath?e (I speak as people do!) 6May it never be! For then, how will God judge the world? 7For if through my lie the truth of God overflowed to his [own] glory, why am I still a Isaias (Isaiah) 52:5 (NT agrees with LXX against MT); Ezekiel 36:22 Greek “they” c NT agrees with LXX against MT d Psalms 51:4 / 50 LXX e Or “punishment / retribution / anger” b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ judged as a sinner? 8Why not (as we are slanderously reported and as some affirm that we say), “Let us do evil, so that good may come?” Those who say so are justly condemned.
 9What then? Are we better than they? No, by no means! For we previously warned both Jews and Greeks that they are all under sin.
 10As it is written, There is no one righteous; no, not one.
 There is no one who understands.
 There is no one who seeks after God.
 They have all turned aside.
 They have together become worthless.
a There is no one who does good, no, not so much as one.
b Their throat is an open grave,c With their tongues they have used deceit.
d The poison of vipers is under their lips;e Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
f Their feet are swift to shed blood.
 Destruction and misery are in their ways.
 The way of peace, they have not known.
g There is no fear of God before their eyes.
h The righteousness of God – Faith and the works of the Law 19Now, we know that whatever the law says, it speaks to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be closed, and so that the whole world may be brought under the judgment of God.
 20The reason is that by the works of the law, no flesh will be justified in his sight because the exact knowledgei of sin comes through the law.
 21But now, a righteousness of God has been revealed apart from the law; and the law and the prophets bear witness to it.
 22It is the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ to all and on all those who believe.
 23There is no distinction because all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.
 24All are being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
 25God purposedj him to be an atoning sacrificek through the shedding of his blood a NT agrees with LXX against MT Psalms 14:1-3 (agrees with LXX against MT); 53:1-3; Ecclesiastes 7:20 c NT agrees with LXX against MT d Psalms 5:9 e Psalms 140:3 / 139 LXX.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT f Psalms 10:7 / 9 LXX.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT g Isaias (Isaiah) 59:7-8 h Psalms 36:1 / 35 LXX i Or “recognition / awareness” j Or “set him forth / presented” k Or “a propitiation” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 356 and to be receiveda through faith.
 This was to demonstrate his righteousness by passing over prior sins, according to God’s patience.
 26This was also to demonstrate his righteousness at this present time, so that Godb might himself be just and the justifier of whoever has faith in Jesus.
 27Where then is the boasting? It is excluded! By what kind of law? [The law] of works? No, but by a law of faith! 28Therefore, we maintain that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law.
 29Or is God the God of the Jews only? Is he not the God of the Gentiles as well? Indeed, [he is the God] of the Gentiles too, 30since there is one God who will justify the circumcised by means of faith, and the uncircumcised through faith.
 31Do we then nullify the law through faith? May it never be! In fact, we upholdc the law.
 4 About Abraham What then will we say that Abraham (our forefather according to the flesh) gained? 2Certainly, if Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about, although not before God.
 3For what does the Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was accountedd to him as righteousness.
”e 4Now, to the one who works, the reward is not considered as a gracef but as something owed.
 5But to one who does not work but believes in the one who justifies the ungodly, it is faith that is accounted for righteousness.
 6Even as David also pronounces blessing on the man to whom God attributesg righteousness apart from works: 7 8 Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
 Blessed is the man whom the Lord will by no means charge with sin.
h 9Is this blessing then pronounced on the circumcised {only}, or on the uncircumcised as well? For we say that faith was accounted to Abraham as righteousness.
 10How then was faith taken into account? Was it before or after he had been circumcised? It was not after, but before he was circumcised! 11He received the sign of circumcision, (a seal of the a Or “accepted” Greek “he” c Or “support / place on its true footing (NJB)” d Or “reckoned / credited” e Genesis 15:6 f That is something underserved (The Greek word ca,rin (grace) means “underserved kindness, or favor”) g Or “reckons / credits / counts” h Psalms 32:1-2 / 31 LXX b of the flesh is hostile towards God; certainly, it is not subject to God’s law, a Or “commandment” Or “endure” c Or “spirit” – Capitalization is difficult to ascertain in this section.
 CT omits “who do not walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit” d Or “spirit” – also in 4-9 (see note above) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 362 and indeed it cannot be.
 8Those who are in the flesh cannot please God.
 9However, you are not in the flesh but in the spirit, since the Spirit of God dwells in you.
 But {surely}a anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him.
 10If Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive because of righteousness.
 11But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you.
 12And so, brethren, we are not in debt to the flesh that we should live after the flesh.
 13For if you live after the flesh, you must die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, then you will live! 14As many as are led by the Spirit of God are children of God.
 15You did not receive the spirit of bondage to [live in] fear again.
 Instead, you received the Spirit of adoption through which we cry, “Abba!b Father!” Adopted as children of God: hope of glory 16The Spirit himselfc testifies with our spirit that we are children of God; if [we are] children, then [we are] heirs; heirs of God, and jointheirs with Christ; if indeed we suffer with him, so that we may also be glorified with him.
 18For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which will be revealed toward us.
 19As it is, the creation waits with eager expectation for the revelationd of God’s children.
 20Indeed, creation was subjected to futility,e not of its own will, but because of him who subjected it, in hope 21that creation will also be delivered from the bondage of decay into the glorious freedom of the children of God.
 22We know that the totality of creation groans and labors in pain until now.
 23Moreover, so do we who have the first fruits of the Spirit! We groan within ourselves, awaiting the adoption, the redemption of our body.
 24We were saved in hope, but hope that is seen is not hope! Indeed, who hopes for what can be seen? 25But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait for it with patience.
 26Also, the Spirit helps our weaknesses, because we do not know how to pray as we should.
 But the Spirit himself makes intercession for usf with groanings which cannot be uttered.
 27He who searches the hearts knows the way of thinkingg of the 17and a A possible meaning of ei Abba is an Aramaic word for father or daddy, often used affectionately and respectfully in prayer to our Father in heaven.
 c The Greek is neuter (“itself”) as also in KJV and NAB since pneuma is neuter, but the context authorizes the use of “himself” since the personal attributes of the Spirit are emphasized in this passage.
 d Greek avpoka,luyin e Or “vanity / worthlessness / frustration” – the idea is that of a purpose that is both worthless and impossible to reach.
 f CT omits “for us” g Sometimes translated “mind,” but the Greek is fro,nhma b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ Spirit, because the prayers that the Spirit makes for the saints are always in accordance with God.
 God’s purpose: foreknowledge, predestination, justification, salvation, glorification 28We know that all things work together for good for those who love God, to those who are called according to his purpose.
 29Whoever God foreknew, he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, so that his Sona might be the firstborn among many brethren.
 30Whoever God predestined, he also called.
 Those whom he called, he also justified.
 Those whom he justified, he also glorified.
 31What then shall we say about these things? If God is for us, who can be against us? 32He who did not spare his own Son but delivered him up for us all, how would he not also give us all things with him freely? 33Who could bring a charge against God’s elect? It is God who justifies! 34Who is the one who condemns? It is Christ, (who died, yes and rather, who was raised from the dead and who is at the right hand of God,) who also makes intercession for us.
 No separation from the love of God in Christ 35Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Could oppression, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 36Even as it is written: For your sake we are killed all day long.
 We were accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
b 37No, in all these things, we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
 38Indeed, I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, 39nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
 9 Paul’s sorrow for Israel’s unbelief – God’s sovereign mercy I tell the truth in Christ.
 I am not lying and my conscience bears witness with me in the Holy Spirit 2that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart.
 3In fact, I could wish that I myself were accursed from Christ for the sake of my brethren, my relatives according to the flesh, 4who are Israelites.
 Theirs is the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the a b Greek “he” Psalms 44:22 / 43 LXX THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 364 law, the offering of divine service,a and the promises.
 5From them are the fathers and Christ according to the flesh who is over all: God blessed forever.
b Amen.
 6But it is not as though the word of God has come to nothing.
 In fact, those of ‘Israel’ are not all Israel,c 7and just because they are Abraham’s seed, not all are children.
 But, “In Isaac will your seed be called.
”d 8That is, it is not the children of the flesh who are children of God, but the children of the promise are considered as descendants.
 9For this is a word of promise, “At the appointed time I will come, and Sarah will have a son.
”e 10Not only so, but Rebecca also conceived by our father Isaac.
 11Even before her twinsf had been born or had done anything good or bad (so that God’s purpose of election might stand, not of works, but of him who calls),g 12it was said to her, “The elder will serve the younger.
”h 13Even as it is written, “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.
”i 14What then shall we say? That there is injustice with God? May it never Godj said to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, be! and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.
”k 16And so, it is not about someone willing or running, but it depends on God who has mercy.
 17Thus, the Scripture says to Pharaoh, “For this very purpose, I caused you to be raised up, so that I might show in you my power, and that my Name might be proclaimed in all the earth.
”l 18And so, Godm has mercy on whom he desires,n and he hardens whom he desires.
 19You will then ask me, “Why does Godo still find fault? Who can resist his will?” 15For 20But who indeed are you, a human being, to argue with God?p Will the thing formed ask the one who formed it, “Why did you make me like this?”a a Greek latrei,a Or “…flesh: God who is over all be blessed forever.
” This doxology seems to apply to Christ (here called God), as is indicated by a similar structure in Romans 1:25 and 2 Corinthians 11:31.
 c Compare Revelation 2:9 d Genesis 21:12 e Genesis 18:10,14 f Greek “they” g CT puts the phrase “not of works, but of him who calls” at the beginning of verse 12 instead of the end of verse 11.
 h Genesis 25:23 i Malachi 1:2-3 j Greek “he” k Exodus 33:19 l Exodus 9:16.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT m Greek “he” n Or “wills” o Greek “he” p Compare Job 38:1-40:1 (MT) b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ 21Does not the potterb have a right over the clay, to make from the same lump one part a vessel for honor, and another for dishonor?c 22What if God, willing to show his wrath and also to make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath fittedd for destruction; 23and that he might make known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory? 24That is us, whom he also called, not from the Jews only, but also from the Gentiles? 25As he says also in Hosea: I will call them ‘my people,’ which were not my people;e and her ‘beloved,’ who was not beloved.
f It will be that in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ There they will be called ‘children of the living God.
’g 27Isaias (Isaiah) cries concerning Israel: If the number of the children of Israel are as the sand of the sea, It is the remnant who will be saved;h For he will finish the worki and cut it short in righteousness, Because the Lord will make a short work upon the earth.
j 29As Isaias (Isaiah) has said before: If the Lord of Hostsk had not left us a seed, We would have become like Sodom,l And would have been made like Gomorrah.
m The righteousness which is of faith 30What then shall we say? That the Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, [still] attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith; 31but Israel, pursuing a law of righteousness, did not in fact arrive at the law of righteousness.
 32Why? Because they did not seek it a Isaias (Isaiah) 29:16; 45:9; Jeremiah 18:6-11 Compare also with 2 Timothy 2:20-21 c Compare Wisdom 15:7 d Or “prepared / fully complete / supplied” e NT agrees with LXX against MT f Hosea 2:23 g Hosea 1:10 h NT agrees with LXX against MT i CT omits the end of this verse j Isaias (Isaiah) 10:22-23 k Greek Sabaoth (for Hebrew: Tze’va’ot) l NT agrees with LXX against MT m Isaias (Isaiah) 1:9 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 366 by faith, but by the works of the law! They stumbled over the stumbling stone, 33even as it is written: Behold, I lay in Zion a stumbling stone and a rock of offense;a And no one who believes in him will be disappointed.
b 10 About Israel – On salvation Brethren, my heart’s desire and my prayer to God are for Israel, that they may be saved.
 2Certainly, I testify about them that they have a zeal for God, but not according to accurate knowledge.
c 3Being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, they did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
 4For Christ is the fulfillmentd of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes.
 5Moses writes about the righteousness of the law, “The one who does them will live by them.
”e 6But the righteousness which is of faith speaks this way, “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’f (that is, to bring Christ down); 7or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’g (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.
)” 8But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your mouth, and in your heart;”h that is, the word of faith, which we preach.
 9If you will confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
 10With the heart, one believes, resulting in righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made, resulting in salvation.
 11As the Scripture says, “Whoever believes in him will not be disappointed.
”ij 12Indeed, there is no distinction between Jew and Greek because the same Lord is Lord of all, and he is generousk to all who call on him.
 13For, “Whoever will call on the Name of the Lord will be saved.
”l 14But how will they call on him in whom they have not believed? How will they believe in him whom they have not heard? How will they hear without a preacher? 15And how will they preach unless they are sent? As it is written: a NT agrees with MT against LXX Or “put to shame.
” Isaias (Isaiah) 8:14; 28:16.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT c Greek evpi,gnwsin\ d Or “completion, end” e Leviticus 18:5 f Deuteronomy 30:12 g Deuteronomy 30:13 h Deuteronomy 30:14 i Or “put to shame” j Isaias (Isaiah) 28:16.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT k Or “bountiful” l Joel 2:32 b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ How beautiful are the feet of those who preach the Good News of peace,a Who bring glad tidings of good things!b 16Still, they did not all listen to the Good News.
 As Isaias (Isaiah) says, “Lord, who has believed our report?”c 17And so, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
 18But I say, did they not hear? Yes, most certainly: Their sound went out into all the earth,d Their words to the ends of the world.
e 19But I ask, did not Israel know? First, Moses says: I will provoke you to jealousy with what is no nation, With a nation void of understanding I will make you angry.
f 20Isaias (Isaiah) is very bold and says: I was found by those who did not seek me.
g I was revealed to those who did not ask for me.
h 21Yet, regarding Israel, he says: All day long I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and opposing people.
i 11 Israel – A remnant – The olive tree I ask then, did God reject his people? May it never be! In fact, I too am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
 2God did not reject his people, which he foreknew.
 Or do you not know what the Scripture says about Elias (Elijah), how he complainedj to God against Israel: 3“Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have broken down your altars! I am left alone, and they seek my life.
”k 4But how does God answer him? “I have reserved for myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal.
”l 5Likewise, at this present time, there is also a remnant a CT omits “of those who preach the Good News of peace” Isaias (Isaiah) 52:7 c Isaias (Isaiah) 53:1 d NT agrees with LXX against MT e Psalms 19:4 / 18 LXX f Deuteronomy 32:31 g NT agrees with LXX against MT h Isaias (Isaiah) 65:1 i Isaias (Isaiah) 65:2.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT j Or “pleads” (the Greek is present tense) k 1 Kings 19:10,14 l 1 Kings 19:18 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 368 according to the election of grace.
 6And if [it is] by grace, then it is no longer of works; otherwise grace is no longer grace.
a But if it is of works, it is no longer grace; otherwise work is no longer work.
 7What then? Israel did not obtain what it what seeking, but the elect obtained it; and the rest were hardened.
 8This is according to what is written: God gave them a spirit of deep sleep, Eyes not to see, and ears not to hear, Even to this very day.
”b 9As David says: Let their table become a snarec and a trap; a stumbling block; Let it be their recompense! Let their eyes be darkened so that they may not see, And keep their backs forever bent.
d 11I ask then, did they stumble in order to fall? May it never be! However, by their fall, salvation has come to the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.
 12Now, if their fall is the treasure of the world, and their loss [has become] the riches of the Gentiles; how much greater riches will their fullness bring! 13For I speak to you who are Gentiles: since I am an apostle to Gentiles, I glorify my ministry.
 14May I somehow provoke to jealousy those who are my flesh so that I may save some of them.
 15For if their rejection means the reconciling of the world, what would their acceptance be, if not life from the dead? 16If the first fruit is holy, so is the whole batch.
 If the root is holy, so are the branches.
 17But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, being a wild olive, were grafted in among them.
 Having {individually} become partaker with them of the root and of the richness of the olive tree; 18do not boast over the branches! But [even] if you boast, it is not you who support the root, but the root supports you.
 19You will then say, “Branches were broken off, so that I might be grafted in!” 20True; by their unbelief they were broken off, and you stand [in] by your faith.
 Do not be full of pride, but fear! 21Certainly, if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you! 22You see, then, both the goodness and the severity of God.
 Toward those who fell, severity [was shown]; but towards you, goodness, [that is], if you continue in his goodness.
 Otherwise you also will be cut off.
 23As for them, if they do not continue in their unbelief, they will be grafted in {again}, because God is able to graft them in again.
 24If you were cut out of what is by nature a wild a CT omits “then it is no longer of works; otherwise grace is no longer grace” Deuteronomy 29:4; Isaias (Isaiah) 29:10 c NT agrees with LXX against MT d Psalms 69:22,23 / 68 LXX b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ olive tree and were grafted against nature into a good olive tree, how much more will the natural branches be grafted into their own olive tree! Israel’s hardening - The gifts and the calling of God 25Indeed, I do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brethren, so that you may not claim to be wiser than you are: a partial hardening has happened to Israel, until the fullnessa of the Gentiles should come in.
 26And thus all Israel will be saved.
b Even as it is written: There will come out of Zion the Deliverer, and he will turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
c This is my covenant to them, When I will take away their sins.
d 28Concerning the Good News, they are enemies for your sake.
 But concerning the election, they are beloved for the sake of the forefathers.
 29Indeed, without regrete are the gifts and the calling of God! 30In the past, you were disobedient to God, but now, you have obtained mercy by their disobedience.
 31Likewise, they also have now been disobedient, so that by the mercy shown to you they may also obtain mercy.
 32Inded, God has bound all human beings to disobedience, so that he might have mercy on all.
 33Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and how unfathomable are his ways! For who has known the mind of the Lord?f Or who has been his counselor?g Or who has first given to the Lord so as to be paid back?h 34 36Indeed, from him, and through him, and to him, are all things.
 To him be the glory unto the ages! Amen.
 a Or “full number” This verse has been interpreted in various ways.
 Some see in this statement the promise that Israel (according to the flesh) will repent and be saved; others interpret this verse as meaning that with the entry of ‘the full number of the Gentiles,’ the fullness of Israel (according to faith) will be reached and “thus, all Israel will be saved.
” c NT agrees with LXX against MT d Isaias (Isaiah) 59:20-21; 27:9 (NT agrees with LXX against MT); Jeremiah 31:33-34 e Often translated “the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable” – Compare Genesis 6:6; 1 Chronicles 21:15 f NT agrees with LXX against MT g Isaias (Isaiah) 40:13 h Job 41:11.
 NT agrees with MT against LXX b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 370 12 Holy worship – One Body, many parts Therefore, I urge you, brethren, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your rational offering of divine service.
a 2Do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may prove what is the good, well-pleasing, and perfect will of God.
 3By the grace that was given to me, I tell everyone among you not to think of yourself more highly than you should! Instead, think [of yourselves] reasonably, as God has apportioned to everyone a measure of faith.
 4For even as we have many members in one body, and all the members do not have the same function, 5likewise we, who are many, are one body in Christ and individually members of one another.
 6We have different gifts according to the grace given to us: if it is prophecy, let us prophesy according to the measure of our faith.
 7If it is service, let us dedicate ourselves to service! He who teaches should do his teaching; 8or he who exhorts his exhorting.
 As for the one who gives, let the giving be done with generosity.
 He who rules should rule with diligence and the one who shows mercy should do so with joy.
 Christian living 9Let your love be without hypocrisy.
 Reject with horror what is evil.
 Cling to what is good.
 10In love for the brethren, be tenderly affectionate with one another; place the honor of others above your own.
 11Do not fall back in zeal; be fervent in the spirit,b serving the Lord.
 12Rejoice in hope, endure in troubles, persevere in prayer; 13contribute to the needs of the saints; look for opportunities to be hospitable.
 14Bless those who persecute you; bless, and do not curse! 15Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep! 16Be of the same mind one toward another.
 Do not set your mind on exalted things, but associate with the humble.
 Do not think that you are wiser than you really are.
 17Repay no one evil for evil.
 Show respect for what is honorable in the sight of all.
 18If it is possible, as much as is in your power, be at peace with all people.
 19Do not seek revenge, beloved, but let God’s wrath follow its course.
 As it is written, “Vengeance belongs to me; I will repay, says the Lord.
”c 20Therefore: If your enemy is hungry, feed him.
d If he is thirsty, give him a drink; a Greek logikh.
n latrei,an Or “Spirit” c Deuteronomy 32:35 d NT agrees with LXX against MT b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ In doing so, you will heap coals of fire on his head.
a 21Do not be overcome by evil; instead, overcome evil with good.
 13 About higher authorities Let every human being be in subjection to the higher authorities because there is no authority except from God, and those who exist are ordained by God.
 2Therefore, whoever opposes the authority opposes the ordinance of God and rebelsb will receive judgment upon themselves.
 3Certainly, rulers are not a terror to the good deed, but to the evil [deed]! Do you desire to have no fear of the authority? Then do what is good, and you will have praise [from the authority], 4because it is for you a ministerc of God for good.
 But if you do what is evil, then be afraid, because it does not bear the sword in vain; it is a servant of God, an avenger of wrath to anyone who does evil.
 5Therefore, you need to be in subjection, not only because of the wrath, but also for the sake of conscience.
 6For this reason, you also pay taxes, because the authorities are ministers of God’s service,d always taking care of this purpose.
 7And so, give to everyone as you owe: taxes to whom taxes are due; revenues to whom revenues are due; respect to whom respect is due; honor to whom honor is due! Love, the fulfillment of the law - The day is near 8Do not owe anything to anyone, except to love one another; for whoever loves the othere has fulfilled the law.
 9Indeed, these commandments (“You shall not commit adultery,” “You shall not murder,” “You shall not steal,” “You shall not bear false witness,” “You shall not covet,”fg and whatever other commandments there are,) are all summed up in this very saying, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.
”h 10Love does not harm a neighbor.
 Love therefore is the fulfillment of the law.
 11Do this, being aware of the time: it is already time for you to awaken from sleep, for salvation is now nearer to us than when we first believed! 12The night is far gone, and the day is near.
 Let us therefore throw off the works a Proverbs 25:21-22 Or “those who resist” c Or “servant” d Greek leitourgoi.
 ga.
r qeou/ eivsin eivj e Greek avgapw/n to.
n e[teron f TR adds “You shall not give false testimony,” g Exodus 20:13-15,17; Deuteronomy 5:17-19,21 h Leviticus 19:18 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 372 of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.
 13Let us walk decently, as in the day; not in parties and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and lustful acts, and not in strife or jealousy.
 14Instead, put on the Lord Jesus Christ and do not think how to satisfy the flesh and its lusts.
 14 Mutual respect Accept the one who is weak in faith, but not to enter into arguments over disputable matters.
 2One has faith to eat all things while the weak eats only vegetables.
 3The one who eats [everything] should not look down on the one who does not eat.
 The one who does not eat should not judge the one who eats because God has accepted him.
 4Who are you who judge someone else’s servant? He stands or falls to his own master! Yes, that one will be made [able] to stand, because God has the power to make someone stand.
 5One person considers that a [particular] day is more important [than the others].
 Another thinks that every day is alike.
 Let each in his own mind be fully convinced.
a 6The one who observes the day should observe it ‘to the Lord;’b and the one who does not observe it should do so ‘to the Lord.
’ The one who eats should eat ‘to the Lord’ because he gives thanks to God! Likewise, the one who does not eat should do so ‘to the Lord’ because he [also] gives thanks to God! 7Indeed, we do not live selfishly and we do not die for ourselves.
 8In fact, if we live, we live ‘to the Lord;’ or if we die, we die ‘to the Lord.
’ Therefore, whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord.
 9It is for this purpose that Christ died, rose, and lived again, so that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living.
 10But [as for] you, why do you judge your brother? Or you again, why do you despise your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
 11As it is written: ‘As I live,’ says the Lord, ‘every knee will bow to me;c Every tongue will confess to God.
’d 12And so, each of us will give a personal account to God.
 13Therefore, let us not judge one another any more.
 Instead, resolve that no one should put a stumbling block in his brother’s way, or an occasion for falling.
 14In the Lord Jesus, I know and I am convinced that nothing is unclean of itself.
 But to the one who considers anything to be unclean, to such a one it is unclean! 15Yet, if because of food your brother is grieved, you no longer a Or “assured” Greek tw/| kuri,w| c NT agrees with LXX against MT d Isaias (Isaiah) 45:23 b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ walk in love.
 Do not destroy with your food the one for whom Christ died.
 16Thus, do not let what is good to you become a cause of evil things being said,a 17because the Kingdom of God is not [about] eating and drinking, but [it is about] righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
 18Certainly, whoever serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God and approved by all.
 19And so, let us pursue things which cause peace, and things by which we may edify one another.
 20Do not overthrow God’s work for the sake of food! All things indeed are clean; however it is evil for someone to create a stumbling block by eating.
 21It is good to not eat meat, drink wine, or to do anything by which your brother stumbles, is offended, or is made weak.
 22Do you have faith? Have it to yourself before God.
 Blessed is the one who does not judge himself in what he approves.
 23But the one who doubts is condemned if by eating, it is not of faith.
 Whatever is not of faith is sin.
 24Now to him who is able to establish you according to my Good News and the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the revelation of the mystery which has been kept secret through long ages 25but is now revealed, and who by the Scriptures of the prophets (according to the commandment of the eternal God,) is made known for obedience of faith to all the nations; 26to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, be glory forever! Amen.
b 15 Endurance and encouragement Now, we who are strong should bear the weaknesses of the weak, and not {just} please ourselves.
 2Let each one of us please our neighbor for what is good, to be edifying to him.
 3Even Christ did not please himself.
 But, as it is written, “The insults of those who insulted you fell on me.
”c 4For whatever things were written before were written for our instruction, so that through patience and through the Scriptures’ encouragementd we might have hope.
 5Now, may the God of endurance and encouragement grant you to be together of the same mind according to Christ Jesus, 6so that with one accord, you may with one mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
 7Therefore, accept one another, even as Christ also accepted you,e to the glory of God.
 8Now, I say that Christ was made a servant of the circumcision for the truth of God, so that he might confirm the promises a Or “blaspheme / slander” TR places verses 24-26 after Romans 16:24 as verses 25-27.
 c Psalms 69:9 / 68 LXX d Or “comfort” (compare also 1 Maccabees 12:9) e TR reads “us” instead of “you” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 374 given to the fathers, 9and so that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy.
 As it is written: Therefore, I will give you praise among the Gentiles, And sing to your Name.
a 10Again he says: Rejoice, you Gentiles, with his people.
b 11Again: Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles! Let all the peoples praise him.
c 12Again, Isaias (Isaiah) says: There will be the root of Jesse, He who arises to rule over the Gentiles; In him the Gentiles will hope.
d 13Now, may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so that you may abound in hope and in the power of the Holy Spirit.
 Paul’s ministry and plans 14I myself am also convinced about you, my brethren, that you are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to instruct others.
 15But I write all the more boldly to you, as reminding you, because of the grace that was given to me by God, 16that I should be a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles.
 I should serve as a priest the Good News of God, so that the offering up of the Gentiles might become acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
e 17I have my boasting in Christ Jesus in things pertaining to God 18because I will not dare to speak of anything except of what Christ has worked through me.
 This is for the obedience of the Gentiles, by word and deed, 19in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of God’s Spirit.
 And so, from Jerusalem, and as far as Illyricum, I have fully preached the Good News of Christ.
 20Yes, I have made it my goal to preach the Good News where Christ was not already called upon, in order not to build on someone else’s foundation.
 21But, as it is written: Those to whom no tidings of him came will see.
f Those who have not heard will understand.
a a 2 Samuel 22:50; Psalms 18:49 / 17 LXX Deuteronomy 32:43 c Psalms 117:1 / 116 LXX d Isaias (Isaiah) 11:10.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT e Compare epiclesis: “for the precious gifts now offered and sanctified” f NT agrees with LXX against MT b TO THE ROMANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ 22For this reason, I was hindered many times from coming to you.
 23But now, since I no longer have any place in these regions and since I had for many years a longing to come to you, 24I [write that I] will come to you whenever I travel to Spain, in order to be helped on my way there by you, and first of all to enjoy your company for a while.
 25But now, I want you to know that I am going to Jerusalem to minister to the saints.
 26It has been the good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among the saints who are at Jerusalem.
 27Yes, it has been their good pleasure, as they are in debt to them.
 For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, they owe it to them to be of service in material things.
 28After I accomplish this and deliver this harvest to them, I will go to Spain by your way.
 29I know that, when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the Good News of Christ.
 30Now I beg you, brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me, 31so that I may be delivered from those who are disobedient in Judea and so that my service for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints.
 32[Pray also] that I may come to you in joy by the will of God, and together with you, find rest.
 33May the God of peace be with you all! Amen.
 16 Greetings I commend to you Phoebe, our sister, who is a servantb of the Church that is at Cenchreae, 2so that you receive her in the Lord in a way worthy of the saints.
 Also, may you assist her in whatever matter she may need from you since she has been a benefactor to many, including myself.
 3Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow-workers in Christ Jesus, 4who risked their own lives for my sake.
 I am grateful to them, and with me all the Churches of the Gentiles.
 5Greet the Church that is in their house and Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the first fruits of Achaia to Christ.
 6Greet Mary, who labored much for us.
 7Greet Andronicus and Junia, my relatives and fellow-prisoners who are outstandingc among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
 8Greet Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.
 9Greet Urbanus, our fellow-worker in Christ, and Stachys, my beloved.
 10Greet Apelles, the approved in Christ.
 Greet those who are of the household of Aristobulus.
 11Greet Herodion, my relative.
 Greet those of the household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.
 12Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who work hard in the Lord.
 Greet Persis, the beloved, who has labored much in a Isaias (Isaiah) 52:15 Or possibly “deacon / deaconess” c Or “prominent” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 376 the Lord.
 13Greet Rufus, the chosen in the Lord, and his mother, a mother to me as well.
 14Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brethren who are with them.
 15Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.
 16Greet one another with a holy kiss.
 The Churches of Christ greet you.
 17Now I beg you, brethren, watch out for those who are causing divisions and occasions of stumbling, contrary to the doctrine which you learned.
 Stay away from them! 18Such people do not serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly.
 By their smooth and flattering speech, they deceive the hearts of the innocent.
 19Indeed, your obedience has become known to all and I rejoice over you.
 I desire to have you wise in what is good, but innocent in what is evil,a 20and the God of peace will quickly crush Satan under your feet.
 May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you! 21Timothy, my fellow-worker, greets you, as do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my relatives.
 22I, Tertius,b who write the letter, greet you in the Lord.
 23Gaius, my host and host of the whole Church,c greets you.
 Erastus, the treasurer of the city, greets you, as does Quartus, the brother.
 24The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all! Amen.
25d a Compare Matthew 10:16 Tertius is here named as secretary or amanuensis of this Pauline epistle.
 c See Acts 15:22 and note d TR places Romans 14:24-26 at the end of Romans instead of at the end of chapter 14, and numbers these verses 16:25-27.
 CT omits verse 24 b TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α 1 CORINTHIANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α) 1 Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and our brother Sosthenes, 2to the Church of God which is at Corinth.
 [You are] those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all those who call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, both theirs and ours: 3Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
 4I always give thanks to my God concerning you for the grace of God which was given to you in Christ Jesus; 5that in everything you have been enriched in him, in all [manner of] speech and knowledge; 6even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you.
 7And so, you lack no gift as you wait for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ; 8who will also confirm you until the end, blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
 9God is faithful, through whom you were called into the fellowshipa of his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord.
 Divisions in the Church 10Now I beg you, brethren, through the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to all speak the same thing and that there be no divisions among you.
 Instead, may you be perfected together in the same mind and opinion.
b 11As it is, those who are from Chloe’s household have informed me concerning you my brethren, that there are quarrels among you.
 12Now I mean this: that each one of you says, “I follow Paul,” “I follow Apollos,” “I follow Kephas,” or, “I follow Christ.
” 13Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul? 14I thank God that I baptized none of you, except Crispus and Gaius, 15so that no one should say that I baptized you into my own name.
 16(I also baptized the household of Stephanas; besides them, I do not know whether I baptized any other.
) The cross of Christ – No boasting 17Indeed, Christ did not send me to baptize but to preach the Good News not in wisdom of words, so that the cross of Christ would not be made void.
 a b Greek koinwni,an (communion, partnership, a close mutual relationship) Or “judgment / decision” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 378 18For the word of the cross is foolishness to those who are dying, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.
 19As it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,a I will bring the discernment of the discerning to nothing.
b 20Where is the wise? Where is the expert of the law? Where is the debater of this world? Has not God ridiculed the wisdom of this world? 21Since in God’s wisdom, the world through its ‘wisdom’ did not know God, it was God’s good pleasure (through the foolishness of this proclamation) to save those who believe.
 22Jews ask for signs and Greeks seek after wisdom, 23but we preach Christ crucified; a stumbling block to Jews, and foolishness to Greeks.
 24However, to those who are called, (both Jews and Greeks), Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God, 25because God’s ‘foolishness’ is wiser than human wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength.
 26Consider your calling, brethren, that not many [among you] were wise according to the flesh, not many powerful, and not [many] of noble birth.
 27Nevertheless, God chose the foolish things of the world to put to shame those who are ‘wise.
’ [Yes], God chose the weak things of the world in order to put to shame the things that are strong.
 28God also chose the lowly things of the world, the things that are despised and even the things that are ‘nothing,’ so that he might bring to nothing the things that are {thought to be important}; 29so that no flesh should boast before God.
 30But by God’s doing, you are in Christ Jesus, who was made to us wisdom from God, as well as righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; 31so that as it is written, “Whoever boasts should boast in the Lord.
”c 2 God’s Wisdom - The Spirit of God When I came to you, brethren, I did not come with excellence of speech or wisdom, proclaiming to you the testimony of God.
 2Indeed, I resolved not to know anything among you, except Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
 3I was with you in weakness, in fear, and in much trembling.
d 4My speech and my preaching were not in persuasive words of humane wisdom but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, 5so that your faith would not stand by human wisdom but in the power of God.
 6However, we [do] speak wisdom among those who are full grown; yet it is a wisdom ‘not of a NT agrees with LXX against MT Isaias (Isaiah) 29:14 c Jeremiah 9:24 d Or “anguish” e CT omits “human” b TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α this world,’ nor of the rulersa of this world, who are coming to nothing.
 7Instead, we speak God’s wisdom in a mystery, the wisdom that was hidden, which God had foreordained before the ages for our glory, 8[a wisdom] which none of the rulers of this world recognized.
 For if they had recognizedb this wisdom,c they would not have crucified the Lord of glory!d 9But as it is written: Things which an eye did not see, and an ear did not hear, Which did not enter into the heart of man, These God has prepared for those who love him.
e 10Yet, God has revealed these things to us through the Spirit,f because the Spirit searches all things, yes, [even] the deep things of God.
 11For what human being knows what is truly human except the human spirit that is within? Likewise, no one truly comprehends the things of God except the Spirit of God.
 12However, we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is from God, so that we might know the things that were freely given to us by God.
 13These are the things we proclaim, not in words which human wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with [other] spiritual things.
 14Now, the naturalg person does not receive the things of God’s Spirit because for they are foolishness to him, and such a person cannot knowh these things because they are spiritually discerned.
 15On the other hand, the spiritual person discerns all things and is not subject to mere human opinions.
i 16“Truly, who has known the mind of the Lordj to [be in position to] instruct him?”k But we have the mind of Christ! 3 God’s co-workers – Spiritual living Brethren, I could not speak to you as to spiritual persons, but as to carnal ones - infants in Christ.
 2I fed you with milk, not with meat, because you were not yet ready.
 Indeed, you are not even ready now 3because you are still carnal.
 As long as there is jealousy, strife, and factions among you, are a Or “manuscripts” Or “known” c Greek “it” d See Psalms 24:7-8 / 23 LXX e Isaias (Isaiah) 64:4.
 Compare also with Sirach 1:10 f Or perhaps “spirit” g Or “unspiritual” h Or “recognize / perceive” i Or “judgments” j NT agrees with LXX against MT k Isaias (Isaiah) 40:13 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 380 you not carnal, walking according to human ways? 4When one says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow Apollos,” are you not carnal? 5Who then is Apollos, and who is Paul, if not servants through whom you believed; and each as the Lord gave to him? 6I planted, Apollos watered, but [it is] God [who] made it grow! 7And so, neither the one planting nor the one watering is anything: only God makes it grow.
 8Now the one planting and the one watering are the same, but each will receive a personal reward according to his own labor.
 9Indeed, we are God’s coworkers! You are God’s field,a God’s building.
 10According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder, I laid a foundation, and another builds on it.
 But let everyone be careful how he builds on it! 11As it is, no one can lay any other foundation than the one that has [already] been laid, which is Jesus Christ.
 12But as one builds on that foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or stubble; 13each person’s work will be revealed.
 Certainly, the Day will make it manifest, because it is revealed in fire; and the fire will test everyone’s work.
b 14If what someone has built on the foundation remains, then a reward shall be received.
 15[On the other hand], if someone’s work is burned, it will be lost, but that person shall be saved, as through fire.
 16Do you not know that your bodies are a sanctuary of God, and that God’s Spirit lives in you? 17If anyone destroys God’s sanctuary, God will destroy him because God’s sanctuary is holy, and this is what you are! 18Let no one deceive himself: if anyone thinks that he is wise among you in this world, let him become a fool, so that he may become wise.
 19Indeed, the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God! As it is written, “He has taken the wise in their craftiness.
”c 20And also, “The Lord knows the reasoning of the wise, that it is worthless.
”d 21Therefore, let no one boast in human beings! All things are yours, 22whether Paul, or Apollos, or Kephas,e or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come.
 All belong to you, 23and you belong to Christ, and Christ belongs to God.
f 4 Stewards of God’s mysteries – Paul’s example And so, let everyone think of us as Christ’s servants and stewardsg of God’s mysteries.
 2Moreover, it is required of stewards that they be found faithful! a Or “farming” Compare Malachi 3:2 c Job 5:13.
 NT agrees with MT against LXX d Psalms 94:11 / 93 LXX e Peter f Or “Christ is God’s” g Or “guardians, keepers” b TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α 3But as far as I am concerned, it is a very small thing that I should be judged by you or according to human judgment.
 Yes, I do not [even] judge my own self 4because I knowa nothing against myself.
 Yet, I am not justified by this, but the one who judges me is the Lord.
 5Therefore, judge nothing before the time, [that is] until the Lord comes.
 He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and reveal the motives of every heart.
 Then, each person will receive due praise from God.
 6Brethren, I have figuratively applied these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit, so that in us you might learn the meaning of ‘not beyond the things which are written,’ so that none of you will be puffed up against another.
 7Indeed, who makes you different?b And what do you have that you have not received? But if you received it, why do you boast as if you had not received it? 8[But] you are already filled! You have already become rich and you have come to rule apart from us! Yes, and I wish that you would really be rulers, so that we also might reign with you.
 9I think that God has displayed us, the apostles, last of all, like men sentenced to death, because we are made a spectacle to the world, both to angels and people.
 10We are fools for Christ’s sake, but you are wise in Christ.
 We are weak, but you are strong.
 You have honor, but we have dishonor.
 11Even to this present hour, we hunger and thirst, we are naked, beaten and [we] wander from place to place! 12We work hard, with our own hands.
 When people curse us, we bless [in return].
 When we are persecuted, we endure.
 13When we are defamed, we try to conciliate.
 We are made as the filth of the world, as the dirt wiped off by all, even until now.
 14I do not write these things to shame you, but to admonish you as my beloved children.
 15For although you have ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet [you do] not [have] many fathers.
 For in Christ Jesus, I became your father through the Good News.
 16I beg you therefore, be imitators of me.
 17For this reason, I have sent Timothy to you, my beloved and faithful child in the Lord.
 He will remind you of my ways which are in Christ, even as I teach everywhere in every Church.
 18Now, some of you, thinking that I am not coming to you, have become arrogant.
 19Still, I will come to you shortly, if the Lord wills! Then I will find out not so much what these arrogant people say, but what power they have.
 20Truly, the Kingdom of God is not in speech, but in power.
c 21What do you desire? Shall I come to you with a rod, or in love and with a spirit of gentleness? a Or “I am aware of” Or “superior” c Greek duna,mei b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 382 5 A case of sexual immorality It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and a kind as does not even occur among the Gentiles, [namely] that someone has his father’s wife! 2And you are arrogant! Should you not rather have mourned, so that whoever has done this would have been removed from among you? 3For I most certainly, as being absent in body but present in spirit, have already, as though I were present, judged the mana who has done this thing! 4In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together, and with my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 5you are to hand over such a person to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that the spirit may be deliveredb in the day of the Lord Jesus.
 6Your self-satisfaction is not healthy.
c Do you not know that a little yeast leavens the whole lump? 7Purge out the old yeast, so that you may be a new lump, even as you are unleavened.
 And certainly, Christ, [who is] our Passover, has been sacrificed in our place.
 8Therefore, let us keep the feast, not with old yeast, neither with the yeast of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
 9I wrote to you in my letter to have no fellowship with those who are immoral; 10yet I did not mean with the immoral people of this world, or with those who are greedy, dishonest, or idolaters; or else you would have to leave the world! 11But as it is, I wrote to you not to associate with anyone who is called a brotherd who is a sexual sinner, or greedy, or an idolater, or a slanderer, or a drunkard, or someone dishonest.
 [In fact], do not even eat with such a person! 12Indeed, what do I have to do with judging those who are outside? Do you not judge those who are within? 13But those who are outside, God judges.
 “Put away the wicked man from among yourselves!”e 6 Lawsuits among Christians Now, how can any of you dare go to court before the unrighteous (and not before the saints) when there is a matter against a neighbor? 2Do you not know that the saints will judge the world?f And if the world is [to be] a Greek “him” Or “saved / rescued” c Or “good” d Or “a brother or sister” e Deuteronomy 17:7.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT (See also 19:19; 21:21; 22:21; 24:7) f Compare Wisdom 3:8 b TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α judged by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest matters? 3Do you not know that we will judge angels? How much more, then, things that pertain to this life? 4And now, if you need to judge things pertaining to this life, why do you place yourselves under judges who are irrelevant in the Church? 5I say this to move you to shame.
 Is there not even one wise man among you who would be able to decide between his brothers?a 6Yet, [I hear of] lawsuits among the brethren, and that in front of unbelievers! 7This is already a fault in you, that you have lawsuits one with another.
 Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be defrauded? 8No, but you yourselves do wrong and defraud, and [you do] that against your brethren! Immorality 9Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the Kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral,b nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor male prostitutes, nor sodomites, 10nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards, nor slanderers, nor swindlers, will inherit the Kingdom of God.
 11Some of you used to be like that, but you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.
c 12[You say:] “All things are lawful for me, but not all things are beneficial.
” “All things are lawful for me,” but I will not be brought under the power of anything.
 13“Food is for the stomach, and the stomach is for food,” but God will bring to nothing both of these.
 However, the body is not for sexual immorality, it is for the Lord; and the Lord is [made] for the body.
 14Now, God raised up the Lord, and he will also raise us up by his power.
 15Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? May it never be! 16Or do you not know that whoever is joined to a prostitute is one body? For God says, “The two will become one flesh.
”d 17But whoever who is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
 18Flee sexual immorality! “Every sin that a person can do is outside the body,” but whoever commits sexual immorality sins against his own body.
 19Or do you not know that your body is a sanctuary of the Holy Spirit which dwells in you, and which you have from God? You are not your own! 20You were bought with a price! Therefore, glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which belong to God.
e a Or “brethren” The Greek word includes all forms for sexual immorality, including all sexual relations outside of marriage.
 c Compare with the Orthodox rite of Baptism and Chrismation.
 d Genesis 2:24 e CT omits “and in your spirit, which belong to God” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 384 7 About marriage and marital relations Now, concerning the matters you wrote to me about: ‘it is good for a man not to touch a woman.
’ 2However, to avoid sexual immorality, let each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her own husband.
 3Let the husband render to his wife the affection due to her, and likewise the wife to her husband.
 4The wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does.
 Likewise, the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does! 5Do not deprive each other {of marital relations} unless it is by consent and for a season, so that you may give yourselves to fasting and prayer.
 Then come together again, so that Satan may not tempt you because of your lack of self-control.
 6Nevertheless, I say this by way of concession, not as a command.
 7Indeed, I wish that everyone would be like me.
 However, each person has his own gift from God, one of this kind, and another of that kind.
 8Still, I say this to those who are unmarried and to widowsa as well: it is good for them if they remain as I am.
 9But if they do not have self-control, let them marry.
 Indeed, it is better to marry than to burn.
 10But to those who are married, I command (not I, but the Lord) that the wife should not leave her husband 11(but if she leaves, let her remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her husband), and that the husband should not leave his wife.
 12As for other cases, I (not the Lord) say this: if any brother has an unbelieving wife, and if she is content to live with him, he should not leave her.
 13[Likewise,] the woman who has an unbelieving husband who is content to live with her should not leave her husband.
 14This is because the unbelieving husband is sanctified in his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in her husband.
 Otherwise your children would be unclean, but in fact, they are holy.
 15Yet, if the unbeliever decides to leave, let there be separation.
 The brother or sister is not under constraintb in such cases, but God has called us in peace.
 16Truly, how do you know, wife, if you will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband, if you will save your wife? Each person’s state of life 17However that may be, let each of you lead the life to which God called you as the Lord has assigned.
 This is what I command in all the Churches.
 18Was anyone called when he was circumcised? Let him not become uncircumcised! Was anyone called when he was not circumcised? Let him not be circumcised! 19Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is a b Or “widowers” Or “bondage,” “is not bound” TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α nothing: what matters is the observance of the God’s commandments.
 20Let everyone stay in that calling in which he was called.
 21Were you called when you were a slave? Do not let that bother you, but if you get an opportunity to become free, use it.
 22Anyone who was called in the Lord while being a slave is a free human being who belongs to the Lord.
 Conversely, whoever was called while free is a slave of Christ.
 23You were bought with a price! Do not become slaves of [other] human beings.
 24Brethren, let everyone, in whatever condition he was called, stay in that condition with God.
 Advice to virgins and widows 25Now, concerning virgins, I have no commandment from the Lord, but I give my opiniona as one who has obtained mercy from the Lord so as to be trustworthy.
 26I think that it is good, (in view of the present distress,) for a man to remain as he is.
 27Are you bound to a wife? Do not seek to be freed.
 Are you free from a wife? Do not seek a wife.
 28But if you do marry, you have not sinned.
 If a virgin marries, she has not sinned.
 Yet, those [who marry] will have tribulations in the flesh, and I want to spare you.
 29Yet, I say this, brethren: the time is short, and from now on, both those who have wives may be as though they had none; 30and those who weep, as though they did not weep; and those who rejoice, as though they did not rejoice; and those who buy, as though they did not possess; 31and those who use the world, as not using it to the fullest.
b The reason is that the outward form of this world is fading away.
 32However, I desire that you should be free from [such] cares.
 He who is unmarried is concerned for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord.
 33But he who is married is concerned about the things of the world, how he may please his wife.
 34There is also a difference between a wife and a virgin: the virgin cares about the things of the Lord, so that she may be holy both in body and spirit.
 But a married woman cares about the things of the world, how she may please her husband.
 35I say this for your own benefit; not that I may ensnare you, but [aiming] for what is appropriate, so that you may serve the Lord without distraction.
 36Nevertheless, if any man thinks that he is behaving inappropriately toward his virgin,c if she has past the flower of her age, and if it is required, let him do what he wills:d he does not sin, let them marry.
 37As for the one who stands steadfast in his heart, (having no necessity, but having control over his own heart to keep his virginity): he does well.
 a Or “judgment” NJB translates as “those who are involved with the world as though they were people not engrossed in it” c This seems to be a reference to a Christian man who was betrothed to a virgin with the intention to remain in an unconsummated relationship, perhaps in imitation of St.
 Joseph and the Theotokos.
 d Or “desires” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 386 38And so, he who marries his [betrothed] virgin does well, and he who does not does better.
 39A wife is bound by law for as long as her husband lives; but if the husband is dead, she is free to be married to whoever she desires, [but] only in the Lord.
 40In my judgment, she is happier if she stays as she is, and I think that I too have the Spirit of God.
 8 Concerning things sacrificed to idols Now, concerning things sacrificed to idols: we know that we all have knowledge.
 Knowledge makes arrogant, but love builds up.
 2But anyone who thinks that he knows anything does not yet know as he should know.
 3On the other hand, if anyone loves God, such a person is known by him.
 4Therefore, concerning the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is only one God.
 5Indeed, although there are [many] things called “gods,” in the heavens or on earth; and there are many [so-called] “gods” and many “lords.
” 6Yet, to us, there is one God the Father, from whom are all things; and we [are] for him; and one Lord Jesus Christ through whom are all things, and we live through him.
 7However, such knowledge is not found in everyone.
 There are some who eat things sacrificed to an idol with awareness of the idol, and their conscience (being weak) is defiled.
 8But food will not commend us to God.
 If we do not eat, we are not worse; and if we do eat, we are not better! 9However, be careful that your freedom may never become a stumbling block to the weak.
 10For if someone sees you who have knowledge sitting in an idol’s temple, will not this person’s conscience, if weak, be emboldened to eat things sacrificed to idols? 11And thus, through your knowledge, the weak one perishes, even the brethren for whose sake Christ died.
 12And so, by sinning against the brethren and wounding their conscience when it is weak, you sin against Christ! 13Therefore, if food causes my brethren to stumble, I will never ever eat meat, so that I may not cause my brethren to stumble.
 9 Paul’s apostleship – His rights Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have i not seen Jesus Christ, our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord? 2If to others, I am not an apostle, yet at least for you I am one! You are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
 3My defense to those who question me is this: 4Have we no right to TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α eat and to drink? 5Do we not have the right to take along a sister – a wifea even as the rest of the apostles, and the brothersb of the Lord, and Kephas? 6Or is it only Barnabas and I who are obliged to work? 7What soldier ever serves at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Or who feeds a flock and does not drink from the flock’s milk? 8Do I speak these things according to human ways? Does not the law say the same thing as well? 9For it is written in the law of Moses, “You shall not muzzle an ox while it treads out the grain.
”c Is it for the oxen that God shows cares, 10or does he say these things for our benefit? Yes, it was written for us, because whoever plows and whoever threshes should do so with the hope to have their share {of a harvest}.
 11If we sowed to you spiritual things, is it [such] a great thing if we reap your material things? 12If others partake of this right over you, should we not even more? Nevertheless, we did not use this right, but we bear all things, so that we may cause no hindrance to the Good News of Christ.
 13Do you not know that the ministers in the temple get their food from the temple, and that those who serve at the altar have their share from the altar? 14Even so, the Lord ordained that those who proclaim the Good News should live from the Good News.
 15However, I have used none of these things, and I do not write these things so that it may be done so in my case.
 As it is, I would rather die than to see anyone make my boasting void! 16Indeed, if I preach the Good News, I have nothing to boast about! This necessity is placed on me: woe unto me, if I do not preach the Good News! 17For if I do this of my own will, I have a reward, but if it is not of my own will, then I have a stewardship entrusted to me.
 18What then is my reward? That, when I preach the Gospel,d I may present the Good News of Christ for free, in order not to abuse my authority in the Good News.
 All things to all people 19For although I was free from all, I brought myself in obedience to all, so that I might gain even more.
 20To the Jews I became as a Jew, so that I might win over the Jews.
 To those who are under the law, [I became] as under the law, so that I might gain those who are under the law.
 21To those who are without law, [I became] as one without law (not being without law toward God, but under law toward Christ), so that I might win those who are without law.
 22To the weak I became as weak, that I might gain the weak.
 I have become all things to all people, so that I may by all means save some.
 23Now, I do this for the sake of the Good News, so that I may be a joint partaker of it.
 24Do you not know that those who run in a race run a Greek avdelfh.
n gunai/ka See Appendix E c Deuteronomy 25:4 d Or “Good News” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 388 with everyone else, but that only one receives the prize? Run like that, in order to win! 25Everyone who competes in the games exercises self-control in all things.
 Now, they do it in order to receive a corruptible crown, but we [seek] an incorruptible crown.
 26This is how I run, not without a goal.
 This is how I fight, not beating the air! 27Instead, I chastise my body and bring it into submission, in fear that after having preached to others, I myself should be disqualified.
 10 Warnings from the Old Testament Now, I do not want you to be ignorant, brethren, that our forefathers were all under the cloud: all passed through the sea; 2and they were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea.
 3They all ate the same spiritual food 4and drank the same spiritual drink.
 They drank from a spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.
 5However, God was not well pleased with most of them because they were struck down in the wilderness.
 6Now these things were written as examples for us, so that we may not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.
 7Do not become idolaters, as some of them were.
 As it is written, “The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
”a 8Let us not commit sexual immorality, as some of them did, and in one day twenty-three thousand fell! 9Let us not put the Lord to the test, as some of them did, and they perished by the poisonous snakes.
 10Let us not grumble either, as some of them did, and they were killed by the destroying angel.
 11Now, all these things happened to them as an example and they were written for our instruction, since the ends of the agesb have come on us.
 12Therefore, let the one who thinks that he is standing be careful not to fall.
 13No temptation has come to you that is not common to everyone.
 God is faithful: he will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able to resist, but with the temptation he will also create a way to escape, so that you may be able to endure it.
 The cup and bread – Against idolatry 14Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.
 15I speak [to you] as to people that have common sense.
 Judge what I say: 16The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a sharingc in the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is not it a sharingd in the body of Christ? 17Because there is one loaf of bread, we, who are many, are one body because we all partake of the one a Exodus 32:6 Greek te,lh tw/n aivw,nwn c Or “communion, participation” d Or “communion, participation” b TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α loaf of bread.
 18Consider Israel according to the flesh: is it not true that those who eat the sacrifices participate in the altar? 19What am I saying then: that something sacrificed to idols is meaningful,a or that an idol is anything? 20[No], but I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons, not to God, and I do not want you to have fellowship with demons.
 21You cannot drink from the cup of the Lord and also from the cup of demons.
 You cannot partake of the table of the Lord and of the table of demons as well.
 22Or do we [want to] provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he? 23“All things are lawful for me,” but not all things are profitable.
 “All things are lawful for me,” but not all things build up.
 24We should not seek our own good, but our neighbor’s good.
 Issues of conscience 25You may eat whatever is sold at the market,b asking no question for the sake of conscience, 26for “the earth is the Lord’s, and its fullness.
”c 27If you are invited for a meal by an unbeliever (and if you are inclined to accept), eat whatever is set before you, asking no questions for the sake of conscience.
d 28But if anyone says to you, “This was offered to idols,” do not eat it for the sake of the one who told you, and for the sake of conscience,e for “the earth is the Lord’s, and all its fullness.
” 29I say conscience, not your own, but the other’s conscience.
 But why is my freedom judged by someone else’s conscience? 30If I partake with gratefulness, why am I denounced for what I give thanks for? 31And so, whether you eat, or drink, or whatever [else] you do, do it all to the glory of God.
 32Give no occasions for stumbling, either to Jews, or to Greeks, or to the Church of God; 33even as I also [attempt to] please everyone in all things, not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many, so that they may be saved.
 11 Be my imitators, even as I imitate Christ.
 Headship – Discipline in the assembly 2Now I praise you, brethren, that you remember me in all things, and hold firm to the traditions as I delivered them to you.
 3But I desire you to know that the head of every man is Christ, the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
 4Every man praying or prophesying with his a Literally “is anything” Technically “meat market” c Psalms 24:1 / 23 LXX d Or “awareness” e CT omits the end of this verse b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 390 head covered dishonors his head.
 5But every woman praying or prophesying with her head unveiled dishonors her head, and it is as if she were shaved.
 6Indeed, if a woman does not wear a head covering,a she should be shaved; and if it is shameful for a woman to be shorn or shaved, then let her be covered.
 7Certainly, a man should not have his head covered, because he is the image and glory of God, but woman is the glory of man.
 8Man is not from woman, but woman from man; 9for man was not created for the woman, but woman for the man.
 10For this cause, a woman should have [a sign of] authorityb on her head, because of the angels.
 11Nevertheless, in the Lord, a woman is not independent from the man or a man independent from the woman.
 12For as woman came from man, so a man also comes [to life] through a woman; but all things are from God.
 13Judge for yourselves: is it appropriate that a woman pray to God unveiled? 14Does not even nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to him, 15but if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her, because her hair is given to her as a covering.
 16But if anyone wishes to dispute these things, we have no other custom, and neither do God’s Churches.
 17Yet, in giving you this instruction, I do not praise you, as you come together not for the better but for the worse.
 18First of all, when you come together as Church, I hear that divisions take place among you, and I partly believe it.
 19Indeed, there must also be factionsc among you, so that those who are approved may be revealed among you.
 20As it is, when you gather together, it is not the Lord’s supper that you eat, 21because each one takes his own supper first!d One is hungry, and another is drunk! 22Do you not have houses where you can eat and drink? Or do you despise God’s Church and put to shame those who have nothing? What shall I tell you? Shall I praise you? In this, I do not praise you.
 Tradition of the Lord’s Supper – Unworthy communion 23For I received from the Lord what also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he was betrayed, took bread.
 24When he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, “Take, eat.
e This is my body, which is brokenf for you.
 Do this in memory of me.
” 25Likewise, he also took the cup, after supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood.
 Do this, as often as you drink, in memory of me.
” 26For as often as you eat this bread a Or “is not covered” Greek evxousi,an c Greek ai`re,seij from which we have the English word ‘heresy’ although the primary equivalent would be ‘schism,’ both concepts being closely related.
 d Or perhaps “without waiting for everyone” e CT omits “Take, eat” f CT omits “which is broken” b TO THE CORINTHIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ Α and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until he comes.
 27Therefore, whoever eats this bread or drinks the Lord’s cup in a manner unworthy of the Lord will be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
 28But let everyone do a self-examination, and then eat the bread and drink from the cup.
 29For whoever eats and drinks unworthilya eats and drinks judgment to himself, if such a one does not discern the body of the Lord.
b 30For this reason, many among you are weak and sick, and many have fallen asleep.
 31If we discerned ourselves, we would not be judged, 32but when we are judged, we are chastised by the Lord, so that we may not be condemned with the world.
 33Therefore, my brethren, when you come together for the Meal, wait for one another.
 34But anyone who is hungry should eat at home, in fear that your coming together might be for judgment.
 Other matters, I will set in order when I come.
 Or “being destroyed / being lost / passing away” Or “recognized” c These verses are the biblical basis for the clause found in the Creed of Constantinople (381): “the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of Life…” b TO THE CORINTHIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ B transformeda into the same image, from glory to glory,b and this is from the Lord, the Spirit.
 4 A difficult ministry Therefore, seeing that we have this ministry, even as we have obtained mercy, we do not waver.
 2We have renounced the hidden things of shame: we no longer walk in clever lies and we do not handle the word of God deceitfully.
 Instead, by the manifestation of the truth, we seek the approval of everyone who has a conscience in the sight of God.
 3Even if our Good News is veiled, it is veiled in those who perish, 4as the god of this world has blinded the minds of those who do not believe, so that the light of the Good News of the glory of Christ who is the image of God should not dawn on them.
 5For we do not preach [about] ourselves, but [about] Christ Jesus as Lord, and [we present] ourselves as your servants for the sake of Jesus, 6seeing that it is God who said, “Light will shine out of darkness,”c and he has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the faced of Jesus Christ.
 7However, we have this treasure in vessels of clay, so that the amazing power may be from God and not from ourselves.
 8We are pressed on every side, yet [we are] not crushed! We are perplexed, but not to [the point of] despair.
 9We are persecuted yet not forsaken; struck down, yet not destroyed; 10and we always carry in our bodies the death of the Lorde Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body.
 11Indeed, we who live are always delivered to death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may be revealed in our mortal flesh.
 12And so, death is at work in us, but life in you.
 13Still, we have the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, “I believed, and therefore I spoke.
”f We believe, and therefore we also speak; 14knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will also raise us with Jesus, and bring us with you into his presence.
 15All these things are for your benefit, so that as grace is extended to many, this may also cause thanksgiving to be multiplied to the glory of God.
 16Therefore, we do not lose heart, but even if outwardly we are decaying, yet our inner self is being renewed day by day.
 17Indeed, the result is that our light affliction (which is temporary) is producing for us an ever-increasing standing in a Or literally “transfigured” (Greek metamorfou,meqa) That is ‘from glory to greater glory’ c Compare Genesis 1:3 d Greek prosw,pw| e Some manuscripts omit “Lord” (CT) f Psalms 116:10 / 115 LXX.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 404 eternal glory! 18This is because we do not look at visible things but at invisible things, and the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.
 5 After death We know that if our earthly tenta is dissolved, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
 2It is certain that we groan in this [tent], longing to be clothed with our heavenly dwelling; 3so that being clothed we will not be found naked.
 4We who are in this tent are truly groaning as we are burdened;b but it is not that we desire to be unclothed; rather, we desire to be clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
c 5Now, the one who has prepared us for this very thing is God, who also gave us the pledged of the Spirit.
 6Therefore, we are always confident and know that while we are at homee in the body, we are absent from the Lord; 7for we walk by faith, not by sight.
 8I dare say that we are courageous and that we would rather be absent from the body and at home with the Lord.
 9And so, we make this our aim: that whether at home or absent, we would be well-pleasing to him.
 10For we must all be revealed before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive according to what was done in the body; good or evil.
 A new creation - The ministry of reconciliation 11But since we know the fear of the Lord, let us try to persuade others.
 What we are is revealed to God, and I hope that we are also revealed to your consciences.
f 12Certainly, we are not trying to obtain your approval once again, but we say this to give you an occasion to be proud of us, so that you may have something to answer to those who boast in appearances - not in the heart [of things].
 13If we are unreasonable, it is for God, and if we are reasonable, it is for you.
 14Indeed, the love of Christ overwhelms us, because we consider this: that one died for all, therefore all have died.
 15He died for all, so that those who live should no longer live to themselves but to him who died and rose again for them.
 16Therefore, we do not think of anyone according to the fleshg any more.
 Even though we used to think of Christ according to the flesh, we no longer think of him this way.
 a Compare 2 Peter 1:13 Compare verses 1 and 4 with Wisdom 9:15.
 See also Isaias (Isaiah) 38:12.
 c Compare 1 Corinthians 15:53-54 d Or “deposit / earnest / guarantee / downpayment” e Or “present” f Or “awareness / consciousness” g This expression can also be translated “from a human point of view (RSV)” b TO THE CORINTHIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ B 17Therefore, anyone who is in Christ is a new creation! The old things have passed away.
 Behold, all things have become new!a 18But all things are of God, who reconciled us to himself through Jesus Christ and who gave to us the ministry of reconciliation.
 19What I mean is that God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not imputingb sins, but having entrusted us with the word of reconciliation.
 20Therefore, we are ambassadors of Christ: it is as if God was making [his] supplication through us: we beg you, on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God! 21God made him who knew no sin to become sinc for our sake; so that in him, we might become the righteousness of God.
 6 Tribulations in the ministry Since we are God’sd fellow-workers, we also entreat you not to receive his grace in vain, 2for he says, At a favorablee time I listened to you;f In a day of salvation I helped you.
g Behold, now is the acceptable time! Behold, now is the day of salvation! 3We give no occasion for stumbling in anything, so that our ministry may not be blamed.
 4Instead, we seek to be approved as servants of God in everything, in great endurance, in afflictions, in hardships, in distresses, 5in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in labors, in vigils,h in fastings; 6in purity, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in a holy spirit,i in sincere love, 7in the word of truth, and in the power of God.
 There is also the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, 8glory and dishonor, evil report and good report; being thought to be deceivers, and yet true; 9unknown, and yet well-known; dying, and behold, we live; punished, and yet not killed; 10sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; poor, yet making many rich; thought to have nothing even though we possess all things! a Compare Revelation 21:1,5 Compare Romans 4:7-8 (Greek logizo,menoj – conveying the idea of “take into account / consider / evaluate / count”) c Compare Isaias (Isaiah) 53:6 d Greek “his” e Or “acceptable” f NT agrees with LXX against MT g Isaias (Isaiah) 49:8 h Or “night-watches” i Sometimes translated “in the Holy Spirit” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 406 11We have spoken freely to you, O Corinthians, and our heart is open wide.
 are not withholding our affection from you, but you are withholding yours from us! 13In return, I speak to you as to my children: be open [to what we have to say].
 12We A holy people 14Do not be mismatched with unbelievers: what association is there between righteousness and wickedness? Or what fellowship is there between light and darkness? 15What agreement does Christ have with Belial?a What sharing is there between a believer and an unbeliever? 16What agreement can there be between God’s sanctuary and idols? For you are a sanctuary of the living God.
 Even as God said, “I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
”b 17Therefore: ‘Come out from among them and be separate,’ says the Lord.
 ‘Touch no unclean thing.
 I will receive you.
c I will be a Father to you.
 You will be to me sons and daughters,’ says the Lord Almighty.
”d 7 Since we have these promises, beloved, let us purify ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, so that we may bring [our] holiness to completion in the fear of God.
 2Open your hearts to us! We wronged no one, we corrupted no one, and we took advantage of no one.
 3I say this not to condemn you, for as I have said before, you are in our hearts to die together and to live together.
 4[But] great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my boasting on your behalf! I am filled with consolation, I overflow with joy in all our afflictions.
 Paul’s joy concerning the Corinthians 5Indeed, even after arriving in Macedonia, our flesh had no relief; we were afflicted on every side.
 There was struggle on the outside and fear inside.
 6Nevertheless, he who comforts the lowly, God, comforted us with the arrival of Titus; 7and not just by his arrival but also by the encouragement a Or “Beliar” – the worthless one Leviticus 26:12; Jeremiah 32:38; Ezekiel 37:27; Revelation 2:3 c Isaias (Isaiah) 52:11; Ezekiel 20:34,41 d 2 Samuel 7:14; 7:8 b TO THE CORINTHIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ B he had received from you.
 He told us of your longing, your mourning, and your zeal for me; and I rejoiced even more.
 8Although I [know that I] made you feel bad with my [first] letter, I do not regret it (though I did regret it for a while).
 I can see that my letter made you sorry, a least for a while.
 9But now, I rejoice, not that you experienced distress, but that you were made sorry to repentance.
 Indeed, you experienced godly distress and thus you did not experience a loss because of us.
 10Indeed, godly sorrow works repentance that leads to salvation, it does not bring regret.
 On the other hand, the sorrow of the world is deadly.
 11Consider what happened in this case: you experienced distress in a godly way and what serious reaction it worked in you! Yes, what apology, anger, fear, longing, zeal, and vengeance [resulted]! In everything you have shown yourselves blameless in this matter.
 12And so, although I wrote to you, it was neither for the sake of the offender nor for the one offended, but so that your devotion to us might be revealed in the sight of God.
 13Therefore, we have been comforted.
 In our comfort, we rejoiced all the more on account of Titus’s joy, because you had refreshed his spirit.
 14I had boasted to him about you, and I was not disappointed! And just as we spoke all things to you in truth, likewise boasting to Titus [about you] was found to be the truth.
 15His deep affection for you is even stronger as he remembers your obedience, how with fear and trembling you received him.
 16I rejoice that concerning you, I can be confident in everything.
 8 About giving Moreover, brethren, we want you to know about the grace that God has given in the Churches of Macedonia: 2in spite of extreme tribulations, the abundance of their joy (and their deep poverty) has resulted in generous giving.
 3I can testify that within their means and even beyond, they gave freely, 4begging us to receive the grace to have such a participation in the ministrya to the saints.
 5We had not hoped for so much, but first they gave themselves to the Lord and to us, by the will of God.
 6As a result, we urged Titus to bring this same grace to completion in you.
 7Yes, as you overflow in everything: faith, speech, knowledge, devotion, and [also] in your love for us,b try to overflow even in this grace {of generous giving}.
 8I am not saying this as an order, but as testing your love by mentioning the devotion of others.
 9For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: even though he was rich, yet he became poor for your sake, so that by his a b Or “service” CT reads “our love for you” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 408 poverty you might become rich.
 10I give my opinion in this matter: it would be the right thing to do for you, since a year ago you were the first to do something (and this was also your will), 11to complete what you were doing.
 Just as there was the readiness to be willing, may there [also] be completion {of this project} according to your means.
 12If you are ready, the gift is acceptable according to what one has - not according to what one does not have.
 13The goal is not that others may have it easy and that you would be in distress; 14this is about a balancing out.
a In this present time, let your abundance make up for what others lack, so that their abundance also may become a supply for what you lack; and may there be equality.
 15As it is written, “The one who gathered much had nothing left over, and he who gathered little had no lack.
”b About Titus 16But thanks be to God who puts into Titus’ heart the same devotion for you.
 17He has accepted our exhortation, but since he was very eager, he [actually] went out to you of his own accord.
 18We have sent along with him the brotherc whose praise in the Good News is known in all the Churches.
 19In fact, he was also appointed by the Churches to accompany us in this grace, which we administer to the glory of the Lord himself, and to show our zeal.
 20There is one thing that we want to avoid: that anyone should blame us about this general gift which we administer.
 21We endeavor to act honorably, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
 22We have sent with them our brother who has proven his eagerness in many ways, but now he is even more eager because of his great confidence in you.
 23Regarding Titus: he is my partner and fellowworker for your sake.
 As for our brothers, they are the apostles of the Churches, the glory of Christ.
 24Therefore, demonstrate your love to them before the Churches; show that we were right to boast about you to them.
 9 The ministry to the saints It is not needed that I should write to you about the ministry to the saints.
 2Indeed, I know that you are ready and I boast about you to the Macedonians, that you in Achaia have been ready since last year.
 Your zeal has encouraged very many of them! 3But I have sent the brothers, so that our boasting about you may not be in vain in this respect: as I have said, be prepared.
 4Otherwise, if anyone from Macedonia comes with us and finds you unprepared, we (to say nothing of you) would be disappointed in this a Or “equality / equalization / fair share” Exodus 16:8 c An unnamed Christian b TO THE CORINTHIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ B confident boasting [about you].
 5Therefore, I thought it necessary to ask the brothers to reach you first in order to arrange ahead of time the generous gift which you promised before.
 Thus, may the gift be ready as a matter of generosity, not greediness.
 6Remember this: whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly.
 Whoever sows generously will also reap generously.
 7Let everyone give according to what he has determined in his heart; not grudgingly or under compulsion; for God loves a cheerful giver.
a 8And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that by having what is needed in everything, you may overflow in every good work.
 9As it is written: He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor.
 His righteousness remains forever.
b 10Now, may he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food also supply and multiply your seed for sowing, and increase the fruits of your righteousness.
 11Thus, may you be enriched in everything, so that you may be generous in all things, and through us, this brings thanksgiving to God.
 12This ministry of giving which you perform does not only make up for what the saints are lacking; it also overflows into thanksgiving to God.
 13Seeing that you prove yourselves by this service, the saintsc glorify God for the obedience of your confession to the Good News of Christ, and also for the generosity of your contribution to them and to all.
 14As for them, with supplication on your behalf, they are devoted to you by reason of the exceeding grace of God in you.
 15Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift! 10 Paul defends his person and ministry I, Paul, entreat you by the humility and gentleness of Christ, as one who is humble among you in your presence but bold in my absence.
 2Yes, I beg that I should not have to be bold when I am actually with you by daring to oppose those who think we are acting according to human standards.
 3Even though we walk in the flesh, we do not wage war according to the flesh.
 4The weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh, but mighty before God to overthrow strongholds, 5to cast down fantasies and every lofty thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and to bring every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.
 6Once you have given your complete obedience, we are prepared to chastise any disobedience.
 7Do a Compare Proverbs 22:8a LXX; Wisdom of Sirach 35:8-9 Psalms 112:9 / 111 LXX c Greek “they” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 410 you look at things only as they appear in your presence? If anyone trusts that he belongs to Christ, let such a person reconsider this, that, we belong to Christ as much as he does! 8Even though I should boast some more about our authority, (which the Lord gave for building you up, and not for casting you down), would that not be a shame? 9May I not appear to desire to terrify you by my letters! 10Some people say, “His letters are profound and strong, but his physical presence is weak and his speech is worthless.
” 11Let such people consider this: that what we are in word by letters (when we are absent), we are exactly the same in actions when we are present.
 12We are not venturing to rank or compare ourselves with those who commend themselves.
 But as they measure themselves by their own standards and compare themselves with themselves, they are without understanding.
 13However, we will not boast beyond proper limits, only within the boundaries which God has appointed to us, which reach even to you.
 14In fact, we do not stretch ourselves too much, as though we did not reach to you.
 For we even reached as far as to you with the Good News of Christ, 15not boasting beyond proper limits in the work of others, but having hope that as your faith grows, our [missionary] field among you will be greatly enlarged.
 16This way, we will be able to preach the Good News even to those areas that are beyond you, in order not to boast in what others have already accomplished.
 17But “whoever boasts, let him boast in the Lord!”a 18Truly, it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but it is the Lord who gives [him] approval.
 11 False apostles I wish that you would be patient with me in a little foolishness, and indeed, you are! 2Certainly, I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy: I betrothed you to one husband, so that I might present you as a pure virgin to Christ.
 3But I am afraid that somehow, just as the serpent deceived Eve in his shrewd deceit, your minds might likewise be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
 4Somehow, if someone comes along preaching another Jesus, (not the one we preached), or if you receive a different spirit, (not the one you [first] received), or a different Good News, (which is not the one you accepted), you put up with it well enough.
 5However, I do not consider myself inferior to the superlative apostles:b 6although I am unskilled in speech, I am not unskilled in knowledge.
 No, in every way, what we are has been revealed to you in all [these] things.
 7Or did I commit a sin in humbling myself so that you might be exalted, because I preached God’s Good News to you free of charge? 8I ‘robbed’ other a b Jeremiah 9:24 Or “chiefest apostles, super-apostles, most eminent apostles” (Greek u`perli,an avposto,lwn) TO THE CORINTHIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ B Churches, taking wages from them, so that I might serve you! 9When I was present with you and found myself in need, I was not a burden on anyone because when the brothersa came from Macedonia, they provided according to my need.
 In everything, I have refrained from being a burden to you, and I will continue to do so.
 10As the truth of Christ is in me, no one will stop me from this boasting in the regions of Achaia.
 11Why do I say this? Because I do not love you? God knows that I do! 12But what I do, I will keep doing, in order that those who wish to boast as we do may have no such occasion.
 13As it is, such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, trying to pass themselves off as Christ’s apostles.
 14And this is no wonder: even Satan presents himself as an angel of light.
 15It is no great thing, then, if his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness, and their end will be according to their works.
 Paul’s ‘boasting’ 16I say it again: may you not think that I am fool! But if you do, receive me still as foolish, so that I also may boast a little.
 17What I [now] speak, I do not speak according to the Lord, but in foolishness, in this confidence of boasting.
 18And since I see that many boast as humans do,b I will also boast.
 19Yes, since you are wise, you bear with the foolish gladly! 20In fact, you put up with someone who brings you into slavery, devours you, takes you captive, exalts himself, or strikes you on the face.
 21I say this to our shame: we were too weak for that! However, if anyone is bold (I speak in foolishness), I am bold as well.
 22Are they Hebrews? So am I! Are they Israelites? So am I! Are they Abraham’s seed? So am I! 23Are they Christ’s servants? I am even more so (I speak as a fool)! I was in more labors, more in prisons, beaten countless times, often close to death.
 24Five times, I was beaten with stripes (forty times minus one) from the Jews.
 25Three times, I was beaten with rods.
 Once, I received a stoning.
 Three times, I suffered shipwreck and was for a night and a day in the open sea.
 26I have been in travels often, in danger from rivers, robbers, from my countrymen, from the Gentiles; in danger in the city, in the wilderness, at sea, among false brothers; 27in toil and hardship, in vigils often, in hunger and thirst, often fasting, and in cold and nakedness.
 28Besides those things which are external, there is something that presses on me daily: anxietyc for all the Churches.
 29If anyone is weak, do I not feel weak too? If anyone stumbles, do I not burn with indignation? 30But if I must boast, I will boast about those things that have to do my weakness.
 31The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, he who is blessed unto the a Or “brethren” Literally “after the flesh, based on fleshly things” c Or “care” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 412 ages, knows that I do not lie.
 32In Damascus, the governor of King Aretas guarded the city in order to arrest me.
 33But I was let down in a basket along the wall through a window, and this is how I escaped from his hands.
 12 Visions and revelations - A thorn in the flesh Without a doubt, it is not profitable for me to boast, but I will now discuss visions and revelations from the Lord.
 2I know a mana in Christ, who fourteen years ago, was caught up into the third heaven (whether [it was] in the body, I do not know, or whether out of the body, I do not know; God knows).
 3[Yes], I know such a man (whether in the body, or outside of the body, I do not know; God knows), 4how he was caught up into Paradise, and heard ineffable words, which it is not lawful for anyone to utter.
 5On behalf of such a person, I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except in my weaknesses.
 6If my intention is to boast, I will not be foolish: I will speak the truth.
 But now, I shall stop, so that no one may think more of me than what is seen in me or heard from me.
 7Because of the tremendous greatness of these revelations, a thorn in the flesh was given to me, a messenger of Satan that torments me, so that I would not be too exalted.
 Yes, I should not be too exalted! 8Concerning this thing, I begged the Lord three times that it might depart from me, 9but he replied to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.
” And so, it is with joy that I would rather [find] gloryb in my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest on me.
 10Therefore, I take pleasure in weaknesses, in injuries, necessities, persecutions, distresses, {all this} for Christ’s sake.
 For when I am weak, then I am strong! 11I have acted foolishly in this boasting, but you compelled me! I should have been commended by you, because even though I am nothing, I am not in anything inferior to the very best apostles.
 12Truly, the signs of an apostle were worked among you in all patience, in signs, wonders and mighty deeds.
 13Were you in any way made inferior to the rest of the Churches, except that I was not a [financial] burden to you? Forgive me this wrong! Concerns for the Corinthians 14Here I am, ready to visit you for the third time, and I will not be a burden to you.
 I do not seek your possessions, I seek you! Is it not the parents who should be saving for their children, not the children for their parents? 15I will most gladly spend [for you] and be spent for your souls.
 If I overflow a b Generally understood as a reference to Paul himself Or “boast” TO THE CORINTHIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ B with love for you, am I loved less? 16Be that as it may, I did not place a burden on you: {and some might say that} being crafty, I caught you with deception! 17Or did I take advantage of you by means of those I sent you? 18I gave instructions to Titus and sent the brother with him.
 Did Titus take any advantage of you? Did we not walk in the same spirit? Did we not walk in the same steps? 19Again, do you think that we are making an apology to you? In the sight of God, we speak in Christ.
 All things, beloved, are to build you up.
 20Still, I am afraid that somehow, when I arrive, I might find you as I would wish, and that I might be found by you not as you would wish.
 I am afraid that somehow, there would be strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, factions, slander, whisperings, proud thoughts, riots, etc.
 21[Yes, I am afraid] that when I arrive, my God may again humiliate me before you, and I would mourn for those who have sinned before and not repented of the impurity, sexual immorality and lustfulness which they have committed.
 13 This is the third time I am coming to you! “At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.
”a 2As I have said before and now repeat, as I did during my second visit; now that I am absent, I write to those who have sinned and to all the rest: if I come again, I will not spare; 3seeing that you seek a proof that Christ speaks in me.
 He is not weak toward you, but powerful in you.
 4He was crucified in weakness, but he lives through the power of God.
 We too are weak in him, but we will live with him through the power of God {which is also} for you.
 5Test yourselves and see whether you are in the faith, yes, test your own selves.
 Do you not know that Jesus Christ is in you? – unless, indeed, if you are disqualified.
 6But I hope that you will realize that we are not disqualified.
 7I pray to God that you do not commit anything evil, not that we may appear approved, but that you may do what is honorable, (even if we appear to be disapproved).
 8Indeed, we can do nothing against the truth, only for the truth, 9and we rejoice when we are weak and you are strong! We also pray for this; that you would become perfect.
b 10And so, I write these things while absent, so that I may not have to deal [with you] harshly when I arrive, according to the authority which the Lord gave me for building up, not for tearing down.
 a b Deuteronomy 19:15 Or “complete” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 414 Encouragement 11Finally, brethren, rejoice! Be perfected, be comforted, be of the same mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you.
 12Greet one another with a holy kiss! 13All the saints greet you.
 14May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with all of you.
 Amen.
 TO THE GALATIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΓΑΛΑΤΑΣ GALATIANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΓΑΛΑΤΑΣ) 1 Paul, an apostle (sent neither by human commission nor from human authorities, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead), 2and all the brethren who are with me, to the Churches of Galatia: 3Grace to you and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, 4who gave himself for our sins, so that he might rescue us from this present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father - 5to whom be the glory unto ages of ages! Amen.
 A different “Good News” 6I am amazed that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you in the grace of Christ in order to embrace a different “Good News” - 7and there is no other “Good News!” Yet, there are some who disturb you and want to pervert the Good News of Christ.
 8Now, even if ourselves or an angel from heaven should preach to you any “Good News” that is not what we preached to you, let such a one be accursed!a 9We have said it before and now I say it again: if anyone preaches to you any other “Good News” than what you received, let such a one be accursed! 10I am now seeking to please God or people? I am striving to please human beings? But if I was still trying to please men, then I would not be a servant of Christ! Paul’s account 11As regards the Good News which I preached, I proclaimed this to you, brethren, that it is not of human origin.
 12I did not receive it from man and I was not taught [this Good News] by man, but it came to me through a revelation of Jesus Christ.
 13You have heard about how I used to live in Judaism, how I persecuted the Church of God beyond measure, and how I ravaged it.
 14I advanced in the Jewish religion beyond many of my own age among my countrymen, as I was more extremely zealous for the traditions of my forefathers.
 15But when it was the good pleasure of God, (who had set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me through his grace, 16to reveal his Son in me so that I might preach him among the Gentiles), I did not immediately confer with flesh and blood: 17I did not go up to Jerusalem to visit those who were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia.
 a Greek anathema THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 416 Later on, I returned to Damascus.
 18Then, after three years, I did go up to Jerusalem to visit Peter and I stayed with him for fifteen days.
 19However, I did not see any of the other apostles,a except James, ‘the Lord’s brother.
’b 20Now, regarding the things which I write to you, you can see that I am not lying before God.
 21After that, I visited the districts of Syria and Cilicia.
 22My face was still unknown to the Churches of Judea which were in Christ; 23they only heard, “The one who once persecuted us is now preaching the faith that he once tried to destroy!” 24And they glorified God in me.
 2 Fourteen years later, I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas and Titus accompanied me.
 2I went up by revelation and I presented to themc the Good News which I preach among the Gentiles.
 I did so in private in front of those who were recognized leaders, for fear that I might be running (or had been running) in vain.
 3But even though Titus (who was with me) was a Greek, he was not compelled to be circumcised.
 4This occurred because false brethren were secretly brought in, and they sneaked in to spy on the freedom which we have in Christ Jesus, so that they might bring us into slavery.
 5But in this regard, we gave them no room, not even for an hour, so that the truth of the Good News might continue with you.
 6As far as the recognized leaders are concerned (what they wered {before} makes no difference to me; God does not discriminate), I can say that those who were respected added nothing to me.
 7Instead, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the Good News for the uncircumcised, just as Peter [had been entrusted] with the Good News for those who are circumcised 8(since he who appointed Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision also appointed me to the Gentiles); 9and when they perceived the grace that was given to me, James, Kephase and John who were considered as pillars gave to Barnabas and myself the right hand of fellowship, [showing] that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to those who are circumcised.
 10They only asked us to remember the poorf - which is the very thing that I was eager to do.
 a It is unclear if ‘apostles’ is a reference to the Twelve, or to the Seventy, or to an even wider group.
 Here, James is included among the apostles and may be either James of Alphaeus (of the Twelve) or James of Jerusalem (if they are to be distinguished according to Orthodox tradition).
 b See Appendix E c That is Peter, James of Jerusalem (whose identity is discussed in Appendix E) and John; it could also be more general reference to those in Jerusalem.
 d Or perhaps “whether they actually were important or not” e Peter f Probably a reference to the Christians of Jerusalem and Judea TO THE GALATIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΓΑΛΑΤΑΣ Paul confronts Kephas (Peter) in Antioch 11However, when Kephas came to Antioch, I resisted him to his face, because he stood condemned.
 12Before some people came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles.
 But when they arrived, he drew back and separated himself, fearing those who were of the circumcision! 13Moreover, the rest of the Jews joined him in his hypocrisy, and even Barnabas was carried away with their hypocrisy! 14When I saw that their behavior was not consistent with the truth of the gospel,a I said to Peter before them all, “If you, being a Jew, live as the Gentiles do, and not as the Jews do, why do you compel the Gentiles to live as the Jews do? Faith and the works of the law 15As for us, being Jews by nature and not Gentile sinners, 16yet knowing that no one is justified by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, we believed in Christ Jesus, so that we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law, because no one will be justified by the works of the law.
 17But if, even though we desired to be justified in Christ, we were found to be sinners, does that mean that Christ is a servant of sin? Certainly not! 18Indeed, if I build up again those things which I [once] destroyed, I show that I am breaking the law.
 19For I, through the law, died to the law, so that I might live to God.
 20I have been crucified with Christ, and it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.
 I now live this life in the flesh, but I live [it] by faith in the Son of God who loved me and who gave himself up for me.
 21I do not nullify the grace of God! For if righteousness is through the law, then Christ died for nothing!” 3 Senseless Galatians! Christ was openly presented to you as crucified - who then bewitched you not to obey the truth?b 2I just want to hear this from you: did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law or by believing what you heard? 3Are you that senseless that having begun in the Spirit, you now end in the flesh? 4Did you suffer so many things in vain, if it is indeed in vain? 5Hec who provides you with the Spirit and works miracles among you, does he do it by the works of the law or by the hearing of faith? 6Even as Abraham “believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness,” 7know,d therefore, that those who are of faith are likewise Abraham’s children.
 8As foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, the Scripture announced the future Good News to Abraham by saying, “In you a Or “Good News” CT omits “not to obey the truth” c That is, God d Or “recognize / acknowledge” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 418 all the nations will be blessed.
”a 9And so, those of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham.
 10But those who depend on the works of the law are under a curse, for it is written: Cursed is everyone who does not persevere in all the things that are written in the book of the law, to do them.
b 11Now, it is obvious that no one is justified by the law before God, because “The righteous will live by faith.
”c 12The law is not of faith, but, “The one who does these things will live by them.
”d The law and the promise 13Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for our sake.
 For it is written, “Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree,”e 14so that Abraham’s blessing might also come to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, and that we might {all} receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
 15Brethren, even speaking of a human example; when a person’s will has been confirmed, it cannot be cancelled or altered (even though it is only a human contract).
 16Now, the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed.
 [Notice that] he does not say, “to seeds,” as if there were many, but as of one, “to your seed,”f which is Christ.
 17What I am saying is this: the law, which came four hundred thirty years after the covenant previously confirmed by God in Christ, does not cancel it to make the promise of no effect.
 18If the inheritance comes from the law, it is no longer from the promise; but in fact, God granted it to Abraham by way of a promise.
 19What then is the law about? It was added because of transgressions, until the seed to whom the promise had been made should come, and it was established through the angels, by the hand of a mediator.
 20Now, there is no mediator when there is only one party, and God is one.
 21Therefore, is the law against God’s [own] promises? Certainly not! If a law had been given which could make alive, then certainly, righteousness would have been from the law.
 22But in fact, the Scriptures declared all things to be captive under sin, so that the promise might be given to those who believe, that is by faith in Jesus Christ.
 23Nevertheless, before faith came, we were kept in custody under the law, locked up to wait for the faith which would later on be revealed.
 24Hence, the law was our tutor which was to bring us a Genesis 12:3; 18:18; 22:18 Deuteronomy 27:26.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT c Habakkuk 2:4 d Leviticus 18:5 e Deuteronomy 21:23.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT f Genesis 12:7; 13:15; 24:7.
 NT agrees with LXX (12:7) against MT b TO THE GALATIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΓΑΛΑΤΑΣ to Christ, so that we might be justified by faith.
 25But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a tutor, 26and you are all God’s children, through faith in Christ Jesus! 27For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
 28There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
 29If you are Christ’s, then you are Abraham’s seed and heirs according to the promise.
 4 Free children Here is my point: as long as the heir is a child, he is no different than a slave, although being the owner of everything.
 2The heir is under tutors and trustees until the day appointed by the father.
 3Likewise, when we too were children, we were held in bondage under the elemental principles of the world.
 4But when the fullness of the time came, God sent forth his Son, born to a woman, born under the law, 5so that he might redeem those who were under the law and so that we might receive adoption as children.
 6And because you are children, God has sent forth the Spirita of his Son into your hearts, crying, “Abba,b Father!” 7Now, you are no longer slaves, but children; and if [you are] children, then [you are] heirs of God through Christ.
 Return to slavery 8In the past, as you did not know God, you were in bondage to those who by naturec are not gods.
 9But now that you have come to know God, or rather come to be known by God, why do you return to the weak and miserable primordial forcesd whose slaves you want to be all over again? 10You observe days, months, seasons, and years.
.
.
 11I am afraid concerning you, that I may have wasted my labor for you.
 12I beg you, brethren, become as I am, for I also have become as you are.
 You have never treated me wrongly, 13but you know that it was an illness that first gave me an opportunity to preach the Good News to you.
 14Even though my condition was a trial for you, you did not despise nor reject me; instead, you received me as an angele of God, even as Christ Jesus! 15What has happened to the blessing you enjoyed? Indeed, I bear witness to you that, if possible, you would have plucked out your eyes and given a Or “spirit” Abba is a Greek spelling for the Aramaic word for “Father,” “Papa” or “Daddy” used in a familiar, respectful, and loving way.
 c Greek fu,sei d Or “elemental principles” e Or “messenger” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 420 them to me! 16And now, have I become your enemy by telling you the truth? 17Those people pursue you, but not for good.
 No, they desire to cut you off from us, so that you might eagerly seek after them.
 18But it is always good to be zealous in a good cause, not only when I am present with you! 19My little children, I am again in labor over you, until Christ is formed in you! 20I wish that I could be with you in person now, to change my tone, because I am confused about you.
 21Tell me, since you desire to be under the law, {why} do you not listen to the law? Two mountains 22For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the servant, and one by the free woman.
a 23However, the son by the servant was born according to the flesh, but the son by the free woman was born through a promise.
 24These things contain an allegoryb which represents two covenants.
 One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children to slavery, and that is Hagar.
 25This Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and it corresponds to the Jerusalem that exists now, in slavery with her children.
 26But the Jerusalem that is above is free, and the mother of us all.
 27As it is written: Rejoice, you barren [woman] who bears no child;c Break forth and shout, you that do not travail.
 For the desolate has many more children than she who has a husband.
d 28Brethren, we are, just as Isaac, children of promise, 29and it is now as it was then: the one who was born according to the flesh persecuted the one who was born according to the Spirit.
e So it is even now! 30However, what does the Scripture say? Throw out the servant-girl and her son, because the son of the servant will not inherit with the son of the free woman.
f 31And so, brethren, we are not children of a servant, but children of the free woman! a Ismael by Hagar and Isaac by Sarah Or indeed what we would call a typology c NT agrees with LXX against MT d Isaias (Isaiah) 54:1 e Or “spirit” f Genesis 21:10 b TO THE GALATIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΓΑΛΑΤΑΣ 5 Freedom in Christ or yoke of slavery Therefore, stand firm in the freedom by which Christ has made us free, and do not be entangled again with a yoke of slavery! 2Behold, I, Paul, tell you that if you receive circumcision, Christ will be of no profit to you! 3Yes, once again, I testify to everyone who receives circumcision that he is [now] under duty to accomplish the entire law! 4You who desire to be justified by the law are no longer under Christ: you have fallen away from grace.
 5As for us, through the Spirit, we wait by faith for the hope of righteousness, 6since in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value,a only faith working through love.
 7You were running so well! Who came to block your way so that you would not obey the truth? 8This persuasion is not from him who calls you! 9[Remember], a little yeast leavens the whole batch of dough! 10I have confidence toward you in the Lord that you will take no other view; but whoever troubles you will bear his [own] judgment, whoever that [person] may be.
 11But brother, if I still preach circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? If it were so, the stumbling block of the cross would have been removed.
 12Indeed, I wish that those who disturb you would then emasculate themselves! 13As for you, brethren, you were called to freedom! Only, do not use your freedom to satisfy the flesh, but through love, become each others’ servants 14because the whole law is fulfilled in one message,b which is this one, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.
”c 15But if you bite and devour each other, be careful that you do not end up in mutual destruction.
 16I say this: walk by the Spirit,d and you will not fulfill the lust of the flesh.
 17What the {fallen} flesh desires is against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh! Yes, these are in opposition to one another, so that you may not do the things that you desire.
 18But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
 The works of the flesh 19Now, the works of the flesh are obvious.
 They are: adultery, sexual immorality, impurity, lust, 20idolatry, the practice of magic, hatred, strife, selfish ambitions, outbursts of anger, rivalries, divisions, heresies, 21envyings, murders, excess drinking, orgies, and similar things.
 About these, I warn you, as I have done in the past: those who practice such things will not inherit the Kingdom of God.
 a Or “means anything” Or “word” (Greek e`ni.
 lo,gw) c Leviticus 19:18 d Or “spirit” in verses 16-26 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 422 The fruit of the Spirit – Life in the Church 22On the other hand, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith,a 23gentleness, and self-control.
 Against such things there is no law! 24Those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and lusts.
 25If we live by the Spirit, let us also walk by the Spirit! 26Let us not become arrogant, challenging and envying one another.
 6 Brethren, even if someone is caught in some fault, you who are spiritual must restore such a person in a spirit of gentleness.
 But watch out for yourself in order not to be tempted.
 2Bear each others’ burdens, and thus fulfill the law of Christ.
 3If anyone thinks that he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
 4But let everyone test his own work: then one can take pride in himself, not by comparison with someone else.
 5Yes, each one will bear his own burden, 6but everyone who is being taught in the word should share all good things with the oneb who teaches.
 7Do not be deceived: God cannot be mocked; whatever someone sows is what he will reap.
 8Whoever sows to the field of self-indulgence will reap corruption from the flesh.
 But the one who sows to the Spirit will reap eternal life from the Spirit.
 9Let us not grow tired of doing what is good, for we will reap in due season, if we do not give up.
 10And so, as we have the opportunity, let us do what is good toward all, especially to those who belong to the household of the faith.
 11See with what large letters I write to you with my own hand! 12It is those who desire to make a good showing in the flesh who are trying to compel you to be circumcised; and it only so that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
 13Even those who receive circumcision do not themselves keep the law, but they desire to have you circumcised so that they may boastc in your flesh.
 14As for me, I shall find gloryd in nothing, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world.
 15In Christ Jesus, circumcision and uncircumcision mean nothing; only a new creation {is significant}.
 16To those who live by this rule, may there be peace and mercy upon them, and on the Israel of God.
 17From now on, let no one cause me any trouble, for I bear the marks of the Lorde Jesus branded on my body.
 a Or “faithfulness” Or “him” c Or “find glory” d Or “boast” e Other ancient manuscripts lack “the Lord” b TO THE GALATIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΓΑΛΑΤΑΣ 18May Amen.
 the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 424 EPHESIANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΕΦΕΣΙΟΥΣ) 1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, faithful in Christ Jesus: 2Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! God’s purpose 3Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ.
 4He chose us in him before the foundation of the world, so that we would be holy and without blemish before him in love.
 5He also foreordained us for adoption {as his children} through Jesus Christ according to his purpose and will.
 6This is to the praise of the glory of his grace, by which he freely bestowed favor on us in the Beloved.
 7In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins, according to the riches of his grace 8which he showered upon us in all wisdom and insight.
a 9He has revealed to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he had determined beforehand in Christ.
 10This came into effect when the times had been fulfilled, to bring together all things under Christ, the things in the heavens and the things on the earth; yes, in him! 11In him, an inheritance was assigned to us, foreordained according to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his will.
 12And the end result is that we, who had hoped in Christ, should be to the praise of his glory.
 13You also, when you heard the word of the truth which is the Good News of your salvation, and having believed in it, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise.
 14He is a pledge of our inheritance, until the redemption of those who are God’s possession, to the praise of his glory! 15For this same reason, I too, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you and the love which you have toward all the saints, 16do not cease to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers.
 17[I pray] that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation to bring you to full knowledge of him.
 18Having the eyes of your heartb enlightened, may you experience the hope of his calling and know the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the a b Or “prudence” TR reads “understanding” or “mind” TO THE EPHESIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΦΕΣΙΟΥΣ saints.
 19May you also experiencea the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to his power and might 20which he accomplished in Christ, when he raised him from the dead and made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places.
 21Yes, Christ now sits above all rule, authority, power, dominion, and every name that can be named, not only in this age, but also in the age to come.
 22God put all things in subjection under his feet and granted him to be head over all things for the sake of the Church, 23which is his body, the fullness of himb who fills all in all.
 2 The gift of God You were dead in transgressions and sins, 2and this was your lifestyle according to the agec of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit who now works in the children of disobedience.
 3We used to live among them and we used to live in self-indulgence, doing the desires of the {fallen} flesh and mind, and we were by nature children of wrath, just as the others.
 4But God who is rich in mercy, on account of his great love by which he loved us, 5even when we were dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ.
 By grace you have been saved! 6Godd raised us up with him, and granted us to sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, 7so that in the ages to come, he might show the overflowing treasure of his grace in kindness toward us, in Christ Jesus.
 8Yes, by grace you have been saved through faith, not by yourselves.
 It is the gift of God, 9not of works, so that no one would boast.
 10For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared in advance for us to walk in them.
 Reconciled with God – Members of God’s household 11Therefore, remember that you, the Gentiles in the flesh who are called “uncircumcision” by what is called “circumcision” (in the flesh, made by hands); 12remember, I say, that you used to be separated from Christ.
 You were alienated from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers from the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the world.
 13But now, in Christ Jesus, you who once were far off have been brought near in the blood of Christ.
 14He is our peace, he who made both [groups to be] one and tore down the wall of separation.
e 15He abolished in his flesh a Or “know, recognize” Probably referring to God the Father; compare 1 Corinthians 15:28-29 c Or “ways, course, mode of existence” (Greek kata.
 to.
n aivw/na tou/ ko,smou) d Greek “he” e Compare John 10:16 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 426 the enmity which is the law of commandments with its decrees, so that he might create in himself one new humanity instead of two, making peace.
 16He reconciled both [groups] to God in one body, through the cross, by which he destroyed that enmity.
 17He came and preached peace to you who were far off and also to those who were near.
 18Through him, we both have access to the Father in one Spirit.
 19And so, you are no longer strangers and foreigners! Instead, you are fellow-citizens with the saints, and members of God’s household, 20being built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets.
 Christ Jesus himself is the chief cornerstone; 21in whom the whole building, fitted together, grows into a holy sanctuary in the Lord.
 22In Christ, you too are built up into a dwelling-place of God in [the] Spirit.
a 3 Paul’s commission and prayer For this reason, I, Paul, am the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles! 2Surely, you have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which was given me toward you; 3how by revelation, the mystery was made known to me, as I wrote before in a few words.
 4When you read them, you can perceive my understanding in the mystery of Christ, 5which in other generations was not made known to anyone as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit.
 6I mean that the Gentiles are [now] fellow-heirs and fellow-members of the body, yes, fellow-partakers of God’s promise in Christ Jesus through the Good News.
 7Of this Good News, I was made a servant, according to the gift of God’s grace which was given me according to the working of his power.
 8This grace was given to me, the very least of all saints, so that I might preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable treasures of Christ 9and make everyone see the dispensationb of the mystery which had been hidden in God for so long, in him who created all things <through Jesus Christ>.
c 10This happened so that now, through the Church, the manifoldd wisdom of God might be made known to the principalities and powers in the heavenly places, 11according to the eternal purpose which Gode had in Christ Jesus our Lord.
 12In him, we have boldness and confident access through our faith in him.
 13Therefore, I ask that you may not lose heartf because of my troubles for you, as they are your glory! a Or “in spirit” (i.
e.
 ‘in the spiritual realm’) TR reads “fellowship” instead of “administration” or “dispensation.
” c CT omits “through Jesus Christ” d Or “many-sided” e Greek “God” f Or “be discouraged” b TO THE EPHESIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΦΕΣΙΟΥΣ 14And so, I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 15from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named, 16asking that according to the riches of his glory, he would grant you to be inwardly strengthened with power through his Spirit.
 17I also pray that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith, so that you may be rooted and grounded in love.
 18May you [thus] be strengthened to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth 19of Christ’s love which is beyond knowledge; and that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
 20Now, to him who is able to accomplish much more than all we can ask or think according to the power that works in us, 21to him be the glory in the Church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, now and forerever and unto ages of ages.
 Amen.
 4 Unity and oneness This is why, I, being the prisoner in the Lord, beg you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called.
 2[Walk] with complete lowliness and humility, with patience, bearing with one another in love; 3being eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
 4There is one body and one Spirit, even as you also were called to one hope when you were called; 5one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 6one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all.
 7But grace has been granted to each one of us according to the measure of Christ’s gift.
 8Therefore, Goda says, “When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.
”b 9Now, what does “he ascended” mean, if not that he first descended into the lower parts of the earth? 10He who descended is the [same] one who also ascended far above all the heavens, so that he might fill all things.
 11He gave some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some shepherdsc and teachers, 12for the perfecting of the saints, for a work of ministry, to build up the body of Christ.
 13This is until we all attain to the unity of the faith and to the knowledge of the Son of God, to maturity, having reached the very fullness of Christ.
 14The goal is that we may no longer be children, tossed back and forth and carried about by every wind of doctrine through human trickery, according to clever deceits and mistaken schemes.
 15Instead, speaking the truth in love, may we grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ.
 16From him, the whole body, being fitted and knit together, as every joint supplies and according to the participation of each part, grows and builds itself in love.
 a Greek “he” Psalms 68:18 / 67 LXX c Or “pastors” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 428 A new way of life 17Therefore, I say and testify in the Lord that you [should] no longer walk as the rest of the Gentiles also walk, in the futility of their mind.
 18They are darkened in their understanding, cut off from God’s life because of their ignorance and because of the hardening of their hearts.
 19Having become hardened, such people gave themselves up to lust and they pursue what is impure with greed.
 20But you did not learn Christ that way, 21except if you failed to hear him and to be taught in him, since truth is in Jesus.
 22You were [supposed] to put away the old self which belongs to your former way of life, since it becomes ever more corrupt after the lusts of deceit.
 23Moreover, you are to be renewed in the spirit of your mind, 24and to put on the new self who in the likeness of God has been created in righteousness and holiness of truth.
 25Therefore, putting away what is false, speak the truth toa each other, for we are members of one another.
 26“Be angry, and do not sin.
”b Do not let the sun go down on your anger 27and do not leave any room for the devil.
 28Those who used to steal should steal no more, but rather work hard, even with their own hands to do what is good, so that they may have something to give to those who have need.
 29Do not allow any decadentc speech to come out from your mouth, only what is good to build up as is needed, in a way that gives grace to those who hear.
 30Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by which you were sealed for the day of redemption.
 31Let all bitterness, wrath, anger, shouting and slander be put away from you, along with evil thoughts.
 32Be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving each other just as God also forgave you in Christ.
 5 Be imitators of God, as beloved children.
 2Walk in love, even as Christ also loved you and gave himself up for us as an offering and a sacrifice to God, a sweet-smelling fragrance.
 3But sexual immorality and all forms of impurity and greed should not even be mentioned among you, as is fitting for saints.
 4The same is true regarding filthy and foolish conversations as well as jokes which are not appropriate; instead, give thanks! 5Know this for sure: no one who is sexually immoral, involved in impurity, greedy, or an idolater has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God.
 a Or “among” Psalms 4:4 c Or “corrupt” b TO THE EPHESIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΦΕΣΙΟΥΣ 6Let no one deceive you with empty words; because of these things, the wrath of God is coming on the children of disobedience.
 7Therefore, do not share in their lot.
 8Indeed, you used to be in darkness, but now, you are light in the Lord.
 Walk as children of light, 9for the fruit of the Spirit is in all [manner of] goodness, righteousness and truth.
 10Discern what is well pleasing to the Lord! 11Have no fellowship with the vaina works of darkness, but rather, expose them for what they are.
 12It is a shame even to speak about the things which these people do in secret! 13But all things are revealed when they are exposed to the light.
 14Therefore, it is said: Awake, you sleeper, arise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.
b 15Therefore, watch carefully how you live, not as unwise, but as wise [people], 16making good use of time, because the days are evil.
 17Do not be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
 18Do not get drunk with wine – this is reckless living – but be filled with the Spirit.
 19Speak to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs! Sing and chant to the Lord in your heart; 20always giving thanks for everything in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, even to God the Father.
 21[Finally], be in mutual subjection in the fear of God.
c Wives, Husbands, Christ and the Church 22Wives, be subject to your own husbands as [you are] to the Lord.
 23For the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the Church, being himself the savior of the body.
 24As the Church is subject to Christ, wives should likewise be subject to their own husbands in everything.
 25Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the Church and gave himself up for her 26in order to sanctify her, having purified her by the washing of water with the word, 27so that he might present the Church to himself in glory, without any spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but holy and flawless.
 28In the same way, a husband should love his wife as his [own] body.
 He who loves his own wife loves himself! 29No man ever hates his own body but feeds it and cares for it, as the Lord also does for the Church.
 30Yes, we are members of his body, his very flesh and bones!d This is why a man will leave his father and mother and will be joined to his wife; and the two will become one flesh.
e 31 a Or “unfruitful, empty” Perhaps a quote from an ancient liturgical hymn c Other ancient manuscripts have “in the fear of Christ” d CT omits “his very flesh and bones” e Genesis 2:24 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 430 32This is a great mystery: I speak concerning Christ and the Church.
 33Now concerning you: each one of you must also love his own wife even as his own self; and the wife must respect her husband.
 6 Children and parents Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
 “Honor your father and mother,” which is the first commandment with a promise: 3 “that it may be well with you, and you may live long on the earth.
”a 2 4Fathers, do not drive your children to anger, but nurture them in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
 Servants and masters 5Servants,b be obedient to those who are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, with deep loyalty,c as to Christ.
 6Do not serve only when eyes are on you in order to please human masters, but as servants of Christ.
 Accomplish God’s will from the heart; 7serve with a good attitude, as if you were serving the Lord and not men.
 8Know that for whatever good we do, we shall receive the same in return from the Lord, no matter if we are slave or free.
 9You masters, do likewise to them: do not resort to threats but recognized that you both have the same Master in heaven, and there is no discrimination with him.
 The armor of God 10Finally, be strong in the Lord, with the strength of his power.
 11Put on the complete armor of God, so that you may be able to resist the devil’s tactics.
 12For our struggle is not against flesh and blood but against the principalities, powers, against the world-rulerse of this darkness and against the evil spiritual forces of the supernatural realms.
f 13Therefore, put on the whole armor of God, so that you may be able to resist when the evil day comes.
 Having accomplished all things, may you stand your ground! 14Yes, stand [firm], having the belt of truth around your waist, having put on the breastplate of righteousness, 15having fitted shoes on your feet so as a Deuteronomy 5:16 Or “slaves” c Or “in singleness of your heart” d Or “know” e Greek kosmokra,toraj f Greek evpourani,oij b TO THE EPHESIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΦΕΣΙΟΥΣ to be ready in the Good News of peace.
 16Above all, take up the shield of faith which will enable you to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one.
 17Take also the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit which is what God has said.
a Unceasing prayer 18Pray at all times in [the] spiritb with intercessions and requests; never get tired of this and persevere in your requests for all the saints.
 19Pray also for me, so that I may be given an opportunity to proclaim with boldness the mystery of the Good News.
 20For this cause, I am an ambassador in chains; so pray that I may proclaim it boldly, as I should.
 21I also want you to know my affairs, how I am doing.
 Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will tell you everything.
 22I have sent him to you for this very purpose, to let you know about our condition and to comfort your hearts.
 23Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
 24May grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ, even with unfadingc love.
 Amen.
 a Greek r`h/ma, which means spoken word Or “Spirit” c Or “incorruptible” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 432 PHILIPPIANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΗΣΙΟΥΣ) 1 Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ; To all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the overseers and deacons: 2Grace to you and peace, from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
 3I give thanks to my God whenever I remember you, 4and I always pray with joy when I intercede on your behalf 5because of your partnershipa in the furtherance of the Good News, even from the very first day until now.
 6I am confident of this very thing: that God who began a good work in you will complete it until the day of Jesus Christ.
 7It is right for me to think this way about you, because I have you in my heart and because you are all partakers with me of grace, both in my imprisonment and in the defense and confirmation of the Good News.
 8For God is my witness: I long for all of you in the tender mercies of Christ Jesus! 9I pray [especially] for this, that your love may overflow even more, with an increase of knowledge and all discernment.
 10This way, you will be able to discern what things are excellent, so that you may be sincere and without offense until the day of Christ, 11filled with the fruits of righteousness which are through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God! The progress of the Good News 12Now, I want to you to know, brethren, that what happened to me has turned out to be for the progress of the Good News! 13It became clear to the whole palaceb guard and to others that my chains are in Christ, 14and most of the brethren in the Lord, being confident through my bonds, are even bolder to speak the word of God without fear.
 15Yes, some actually preach Christ out of envy and rivalry, and some also out of good will.
 16The first group preaches Christ without sincerity and from selfish ambition, thinking that they are adding affliction to my imprisonment; 17but the second group does so out of love, knowing that I have been appointed to defend the Good News.
 a b The word translated “partnership” (koinonia) also means “fellowship” and “sharing.
” Or “praetorian” TO THE PHILIPPIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΗΣΙΟΥΣ 18Either way, it does not matter.
 I only care that whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed! I rejoice in this, yes, and will continue to rejoice.
 19For I know that this will turn out to my salvation, through your supplication and the support of Christ’s Spirit.
 20It is my eager expectation and hope that I will not be put to shame in any way, but that as I speak with all boldness, Christ will be exalted now as always in my body, whether by my life or by my death.
 21For to me, living is Christ and dying is gain.
 22But if I remain alive in the flesh, this will bring fruit from my work.
 Yet, I do not know what I will choose! 23I am in a dilemma between the two, having the desire to be releaseda and be with Christ, which is far better.
 24At the same time, to remain in the flesh is a more urgent need for your sake.
 25Having this confidence, I know that I will remain and continue with all of you for your progress and joy in faith, 26so that your rejoicing may overflow in Christ Jesus when I am with you again.
 27[In the meantime], let your way of life be worthy of the Good News of Christ, so that whether I come and see you or remain absent, I may hear this about your condition: that you stand firm in one spirit, striving with one soul for the faith of the Good News.
 28Do not be terrified by your opponents.
 This will be for them evidence of destruction, but to you, of salvation from God.
 29For the sake of Christ, you have been granted the privilege not only to believe in him but also to suffer on his behalf, 30and so you are engaged in the same battle which you saw me fight and that you hear that I am [still] fighting.
b 2 A call to humility Therefore, if there is any exhortation in Christ, any consolation of love, any communion of the Spirit, any tender mercies and compassion, 2make my joy full, by being like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of one mind.
 3Do nothing through rivalry or conceit, but in humility, consider others better than yourselves.
 4Do not just look after you own selfish interests but each one of you should consider the interests of others.
 5Let the following be in your mind, which was also in [the mind of] Christ Jesus.
 6He who existed in the formc of God did not consider equality with God as something to be taken by force.
d 7Instead, he emptiede himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men.
 8And being a [From the body] Or “struggling” c Greek morfh/ d Greek a`rpagmo.
n (or also “grasped, something to be conquered, snatched, carried off, or seized”) e Greek evke,nwsen (related to the word kenosis) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 434 found in human form, he humbled himself, becoming obedient to [the point of] death, even death on the cross! 9Therefore, God highly exalted him, and gave him the Name which is above every name; 10so that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven, on earth, and under the earth; 11and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
 Call to obedience 12And so, my beloved, even as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, 13for it is Goda who works in you, both to will and to work, according to his good purpose.
 14Do all things without murmurings and disputes 15in order to become blameless and harmless, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation among whom you are seen as lights in the world.
 16Uphold the wordb of life, so that I may have a reason to gloryc in the day of Christ: that I did not run or labor in vain.
 17Yes, even if I am poured out [as an offeringd] on the sacrifice and liturgye of your faith, I rejoice and share my joy with you all.
 18In the same way, rejoice, rejoice with me! Paul and Timothy – About Epaphroditus 19I hope in the Lord Jesus [that I will be able] to send you Timothy soon, so that I too may be encouraged when I learn how you are doing.
 20For I have no one else with the same soul,f who will truly care about you, 21unlike others who seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ.
 22But you know how he has proved himself; as a child serves a father, he has served with me to spread the Good News.
 23Therefore, I hope to send him at once, as soon as I see how things are going with me [here].
 24As it is, I trust in the Lord that I too will be able to come shortly.
 25Still, I deemed it necessary to send you Epaphroditus who is my brother, fellow-worker, fellow-soldier, and your apostle and the servant of my need.
 26He was longing for you all and was very troubled, because you had heard that he was sick.
 27Indeed, he was sick, almost to the point of death! But God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but also on me, so that I may not have sorrow upon sorrow.
 28And so, I have sent him all the more eagerly, so that you may rejoice when you see him again, and that I may be less sorrowful.
 29Receive him in the Lord with all joy, and hold such a person in honor, 30because on a Literally “{a} God” (indefinite in Greek, in the sense that is it a divine being or energy that is at work.
 The focus is not so much on the person (God) but on the nature or energy at work).
 b Or “message” c Or “boast” d Or “libation” (a liquid offering) e Or “service / ministry” (Greek leitourgi,a|) f Greek ivso,yucon TO THE PHILIPPIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΗΣΙΟΥΣ account of the work of Christ, he came near to death, risking his life to provide what was lacking in your ministry to me.
 3 Warning against evil-workers – Paul’s background Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord! To me, writing the same things to you is not tiresome - it is safe! 2Beware of the dogs, beware of evilworkers, beware of the false circumcision! 3We are ‘circumcised’ if we offer divine servicea to God in the Spirit, [if we] rejoice in Christ Jesus and have no confidence in the flesh, 4although I myself could have confidence even in the flesh! If anyone thinks that he has {a reason to have} confidence in the flesh, I could even more: 5circumcised on the eighth day, a member of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews.
 As regards the law, I was a Pharisee; 6as far as zeal is concerned, I was persecuting the Church, and as for the righteousness which is based on the law, [I was] found blameless.
 All things considered as a loss - Reaching forward 7However, these things which I thought were gain to me, I have counted as loss for Christ! 8Yes, without a doubt, I consider all things as loss in view of the surpassing value of knowing Christ Jesus, my Lord, for whom I suffered the loss of all things.
 I consider them as dung, so that I may gain Christ 9and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own (from the law), but through faith in Christ (the righteousness which is from God by faith).
 10Yes, may I know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the communion of his sufferings, becoming conformed to his death, 11if by any means I may attain to the resurrection from the dead.
 12I am not saying that I have already obtained these things or that I am already made perfect; but I press on to take holdb of [the prize] for which Christ Jesus took hold of me.
 13Brethren, I do not regard myself as having obtained these things just yet, but I do this: forgetting the things which are now behind and reaching forward to the things which are before [me], 14I press on toward the goal, and the prize is the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
 15Let us who are mature, therefore, think this way, and if you think differently in some way, God will also reveal that to you.
 16Nevertheless, to the extent that we have already reached some point, clet us walk by the same rule and let us be of the same mind.
 a Greek latreu,ontej Or “catch / choose” (in both instances in this verse) c CT omits the rest of this verse b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 436 17Brethren, be united in imitating me, and keep your eyes fixed on those who live this way, even as you have us as an example.
 18But there are many who live as enemies of the cross of Christ, as I remind you often, as I do [even] now with tears.
 19Their end is destruction, their god is the belly, and their glory is in their shame as they think about earthly things.
 20As for us, our citizenship is in heaven, from which we are expecting a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.
 21He will change the body of our humiliation to be conformed to the body of his glory, according to the energya by which he is able to subject all things to himself.
b 4 Instructions - The peace of God Therefore, my beloved brethren whom I miss so much, my joy and my crown, stand firm in the Lord! 2I exhort Evodia and Syntyche to think the same way in the Lord.
 3Yes, I beg you also, Syzygus,c help these women, for they labored with me in the Good News and also with Clement and the rest of my fellow-workers, whose names are in the book of life.
 4Rejoice in the Lord always! Again I will say, rejoice! 5Let your kindness be known to all.
 The Lord is at hand! 6Do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and petition with thanksgiving, let your requests be known to God.
 7And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.
 8Finally, brethren, whatever things are true, whatever things are honorable, whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely, whatever things are commendable, if there is any virtue or any praise, think about these things.
 9What you learned, received, heard, and saw in me: practice these things, and the God of peace will be with you.
 Paul’s needs and thankfulness 10But now, I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that your considerationd for me has blossomed again! (I know that you were thinking about me but lacked the opportunity).
 11I do not want to speak about what I lack, because I have learned to be satisfied with whatever state I am in! 12I know how to be humbled, and I also know also how to overflow.
 In everything and in all things I have learned the secret of being both filled and hungry, to be in abundance and to be in need.
 13I can do all these things through Christ who strengthens me.
 14However, it was a good thing that you shared in my affliction.
 15As you Philippians know well, in the beginning of the Good a Greek evne,rgeian Compare Matthew 28:19-20 c Either a personal name or an expression meaning “true yoke-fellow” d Or “concern / care” b TO THE PHILIPPIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΗΣΙΟΥΣ News when I departed from Macedonia, no Church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving – only you did! 16For even [when I was] in Thessalonica you supplied for my needs.
 17It is not that I seek the gift, what I value is the interest that is accumulating in your account! 18I actually have all things and I overflow since I received from Epaphroditus what came from you, a sweet-smelling fragrance, an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice to God! 19My God will supply all of your needs according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus.
 20To our God and Father be the glory unto ages of ages! Amen.
 21Greet every saint in Christ Jesus! The brethren who are with me greet you.
 22All the saints greet you, especially those who are of Caesar’s household.
 23The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you all! Amen.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 438 COLOSSIANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΛOΣΣΑΕΙΣ) 1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our brother, 2to the saints and faithful brethren in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
a Thanksgiving and prayer 3We give thanks to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and we always pray for you.
 4We have heard about your faith in Christ Jesus and about the love which you have for all the saints, 5because of the hope which is prepared for you in heaven.
 Of this hope you have heard before in the wordb of the truth of the Good News 6which has come to you; even as it is [spreading] in the whole world.
 It has been bearing fruit and growing [everywhere], as it has done in you too since the day you heard and experienced the grace of God in truth.
 7This is what you also learned from Epaphras, our beloved fellow-servant, who is a faithful servant of Christ on our behalf.
 8He has informed us of your love in [the] Spirit.
c 9For this reason, since the day we heard this, we do not cease praying and making requests for you, so that you may be filled with the knowledge of God’sd will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding.
 10We also pray that you may walk worthily of the Lord, to please him in all respects, bearing fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.
 11May you be strengthened with all power, according to the might of his glory, [to be prepared] for all [kinds of] endurance and perseverance with joy! 12May you give thanks to the Father, who has granted use to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in the light.
 13He has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of his love.
 14In him, we have our redemption,f the forgiveness of our sins.
 a CT omits “and the Lord Jesus Christ” Or “message” c Or “spirit” d Greek “his” e CT reads “you” f TR adds “through his blood” b TO THE COLOSSIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΛOΣΣΑΕΙΣ About Christ – The mystery: Christ in you 15He is the imagea of the invisible God, the firstbornb of all creation.
 16For in him, all things were created, in the heavens and on earth, things visible and invisible, thrones, dominions, principalities and powers; all things have been created through him, and for him.
 17He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.
c 18He is the head of the body, the Church; [he is] the first cause,d the firstborn from the dead, so that in all [things] he might have the first place.
e 19For in him all the fullness was pleased to dwell, 20and through him to reconcile all things to himself, both earthly and heavenly, having made peace through the blood of his cross.
 21In the past, you were alienated and hostile in mind in your evil actions.
 now, he has reconciled [you] in the body of his flesh through death, in order to present you holy, without blemish and blameless before him.
 23This is [for you] if you continue in the faith, grounded and steadfast, not moved away from the hope of the Good News which you heard.
 I, Paul, became a servant of this Good News that is being proclaimed throughout all creation under heaven.
 22But 24Now, I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh, I complete what is lacking in the afflictions of Christ for the sake of his body which is the Church.
 25I have become her servant, according to God’s commission which was I received for you, in order to fulfill the word of God.
 26This is the mystery which was hidden for ages and generations.
 But now, it has been revealed to his saints.
 27To them, God was pleased to reveal the glorious generosityf of this mystery among the Gentiles.
 This mystery is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
 28This is what we proclaim, warning everyone and teaching everyone in all wisdom, so that we may present everyone perfect in Christ Jesus.
 29This is what I also work for, struggling with his energyg which is powerfully at work in me.
 2 Spiritual struggles – Against false teachers I want you to know how greatly I struggle for you, for those at Laodicea, and even for all those who do not know me in person.
 2Yes, I struggle so that their hearts may be comforted and for them to be united in love, a Greek “icon” (eivkw.
n tou/ qeou/) Greek prwto,tokoj c The Greek (sune,sthken) can also mean “have their proper place / are formed / consist” d Greek avrch, (also means “origin / beginning / ruler / principle”) e Or “preeminence” f Or “wealth of glory” g Greek evne,rgeian (“supernatural working”) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 440 obtaining the treasure that is in the full assurance of understanding, so that they may know the mystery of God the Father and of Christ.
a 3In him are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge! 4Now, I say these things so that no one may delude you with convincing words.
 5Although I am physically absent, I am spiritually present with you, rejoicing and seeing your order, as well as the solidityb of your faith in Christ.
 6As you received Christ Jesus as the Lord, walk also in him, 7rooted and built up in him, established in the faith just as you were taught, overflowing from faith into thanksgiving.
 Buried with him, raised with him 8Be careful not to let anyone rob you through philosophy and vain deceit, according to human tradition and the basic things of the world, and not after Christ.
 9For in him all the fullness of deity dwells bodily, 10and in him who is the head of all principality and power, you are made full.
 11In him, you were also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, by casting off the sinful nature in the circumcision of Christ.
 12You have been buried with him through baptism in which you were also raised with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead.
 13You were dead in your sins and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, but he made you alive with him by forgiving us all our trespasses and by 14wiping out the handwritingc of ordinances which was against us.
 He removed it out of the way, nailing it to the cross, 15having exposed the principalities and powers, making a public display of them, and triumphing over them.
 Useless or dangerous teachings 16Therefore, let no one judge you in matters of eating, drinking, or regarding a feast day, a new moon {observance} or a Sabbath day.
 17These are a shadow of the things to come, but the bodyd belongs to Christ.
 18Let no one rob you of your prize by false humility and a religion of angels, dwelling on things which such a one has note seen, vainly puffed up by a carnal mind.
 19Such a person is not holding firmly to the head, from whom the whole body, being supported and knit together through the joints and ligaments, grows with the growth given by God.
 20But if you died with Christ as regards these basicf principles of the world, why do you subject yourselves to [these] commandments, as though you were still living in the world? 21“Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch!” 22These things are a CT reads “of God which is Christ” instead of “of God the Father and of Christ” Or “steadfastness / stability” c Greek ceiro,grafon d Greek a[ evstin skia.
 tw/n mello,ntwn( to.
 de.
 sw/ma tou/ Cristou/ - NRS reads “the substance belongs to Christ;” NJB reads “the reality is the body of Christ” e CT reads “has seen” (omits “not”) f Or “elemental, primordial” b TO THE COLOSSIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΛOΣΣΑΕΙΣ all destined to perish with use! These are merely human commands and teachings! 23Indeed, these things have an appearance of wisdom in selfimposed religion, humility, severe treatment of the body; but they have no value against the indulgence of the flesh.
 3 Raised with Christ - Death to what is earthly - The new self If you were raised together with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God! 2Set your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth.
 3For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
 4When Christ who is our life is revealed, then you will also be revealed with him in glory.
 5Therefore, put to death what is earthly in you: sexual immorality, impurity, depraved passions, lust and greed (which is idolatry).
 6Because of these things, the wrath of God is coming on the children of disobedience.
 7You also used to live in those things when you lived among these people; 8but now, put them all away: anger, rage, evil, slander, and shameful language.
 9Do not lie to one another.
 You have put off the old self with his doings 10and you have put on the new self who is being renewed in knowledge according to the imagea of his Creator.
 11Here, there cannot be Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free; but Christ is all, and in all! 12As God’s elect,b holy and beloved, clothe yourselves with a heart of compassion, kindness, lowliness, humility, and perseverance.
 13Bear with one another, and forgive each other! If anyone has a complaint against anyone else, forgive, even as Christ forgave you.
 14Above all, walk in love, which is the bond of perfection.
 15Let the peace of God (to which also you were called in one body) rule in your hearts, and be thankful! 16Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.
 In all wisdom, teach and admonish each other with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your heart to the Lord.
 17Whatever you do, in word or in deed, do it all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks through him to God the Father.
 Christian family – Servants and Masters 18Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
 19Husbands, a b love your wives, and do not be bitter against them.
 Greek “icon” Or “chosen ones” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 20Children, 442 obey your parents in all things, for this is pleasing to the Lord.
 21Fathers, do not exasperate your children, so that they will not be discouraged.
 22Servants,a obey in all things to those who are your masters according to the flesh, not just when they are looking (to please human beings), but in singleness of heart, fearing God.
 23Whatever you do, work with your heart, as for the Lord, and not for men.
 24Know that you will receive the reward of your inheritance from the Lord, for you serve the Lord Christ.
 25But whoever does wrong will receive in return according to the wrong that he has done, and there is no partiality.
 4 Masters, give to your servants what is fair and right, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
 Persevere in prayer 2Persevere in prayer, even in vigils of thanksgiving.
 3Pray for us as well, so that God may open to us a door for the word,b [an opportunity] to speak the mystery of Christ for which I am in chains.
 4Pray also that I may reveal it as clearly as I should.
 5Live wisely before those who are ‘outside,’ and make the most of your time.
 6Let your speech always be pleasant, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to properly answer those who have questions.
 Paul’s fellow-workers 7All my affairs will be made known to you by Tychicus, the beloved brother, a faithful servant and fellow-slave in the Lord.
 8I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that he may know your circumstancesc and comfort your hearts, 9together with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you.
 They will tell you everything that is happening here.
 10Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner, greets you, and Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (concerning whom you received instructions, “if he comes to you, receive him”), 11and also Jesus who is called Justus.
 These are my only fellow-workers for the Kingdom of God who are of the circumcision, and they have been my consolation.
 12Epaphras (who is one of you), a servant of Christ, salutes you.
 He is always wrestling for you in his prayers, so that you may stand perfect and fulfill in all things the will of God.
 13I can testify about him: that he has a Or “slaves” Or “message” c CT reads “you may know our circumstances” b TO THE COLOSSIANS - ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΛOΣΣΑΕΙΣ devotion to you, and also to those in Laodicea and Hierapolis.
 14Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas greet you.
 15Greet the brethren who are in Laodicea; and also Nymphas, along with the Church which meets in her house.
 16When this letter has been read among you, please have it also read in the Church of the Laodiceans; and also read the letter from Laodicea.
 17Tell Archippus this, “Be mindful of the ministry which you have received in the Lord, and fulfill it.
” 18Here is my greeting: Paul, with my own hand! Remember my chains.
.
.
 Grace be with you! Amen.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 444 1 THESSALONIANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΕΙΣ Α) 1 Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy: to the Church of the Thessalonians [which is] in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ.
 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
a Praise and thanksgiving 2We always give thanks to God for all of you, mentioning you in our prayers, 3always remembering your work of faith, your labor of love and your patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father.
 4Brethren beloved by God, we know that you are chosen 5and that our Good News came to you not in word only, but also in power, in the Holy Spirit, and with full assurance.
 You know how we lived among you for your sake 6You became imitators of us, and of the Lord, having received the wordb with the joy of the Holy Spirit, and this in spite of much affliction.
 7And so, you became an example to all those who believe in Macedonia and Achaia.
 8From you, the wordc of the Lord has been proclaimed, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but your faith has been known in many other places, so that we have no need to say anything.
 9Others have given us a report about how you received us and how you turned away from idols to God, to serve a living and true God 10and to wait for his Son from heaven.
 Godd has raised him from the dead - Jesus, who delivers us from the wrath to come.
 2 Paul’s relationship with the Thessalonians You certainly know, brethren, that our visit to you was not in vain! 2Having suffered before and having been shamefully treated in Philippi, as you know, we became bold in our God to tell you the Good News of God in a context of much conflict.
 3Certainly, our exhortation does not come from error, impurity, or deception.
 4But since we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the Good News, this is how we speak, not to please a CT omits “from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ” Or “message” c Or “message” d Greek “he” b TO THE THESSALONIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΕΙΣ Α people but God who tests our hearts.
 5We never used flattering words, (as you know,) and we never put a mask over greed (as God is witness).
 6We did not seek glory from men (neither from you nor from others), even though we could have claimed authority as apostles of Christ.
 7Instead, we were gentlea among you, like a nursing mother cherishes her own children.
 8We became so devoted to you that we were pleased to share not only the Good News of God but also our very souls, because you had become very dear to us.
 9Remember, brethren, our labor and hardship: we worked night and day in order not to be a burden to any of you as we preached to you the Good News of God.
 10You are witnesses with God, how holy, righteously, and blamelessly we behaved ourselves toward you who believe.
 11As you know, we exhorted, comforted, and implored every one of you, as a father does his own children, 12with the purpose that you should live worthily of God who calls you into his own Kingdom and glory.
 13For this reason, we also thank God without ceasing that when you received from us the word of God’s message, you accepted it not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth: the word of God.
 And it is at work in you who believe! 14Indeed, brethren, you became imitators of the Churches of God in Christ Jesus which are in Judea, for you also suffered the same things from your own countrymen, even as they did from the Jews.
 15They killed both the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and they drove us out.
 Their conduct does not please God and makes them the enemies of the entire human race 16as they want to prevent us from speaking to the Gentiles, so that they may be saved.
 They are still bringing their sins to full measure, but the wrath is finally coming upon them.
 Paul’s plans 17Brethren, although we were deprived of your presence for a short time, (yet not in affection), we tried even harder to see you face to face with great eagerness, 18because we wanted to come to you.
 Certainly, I, Paul, wanted to come again and again - but Satan prevented us.
 19For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Is it not you, when our Lord Jesus Christb comes? 20Truly, you are our glory and our joy! 3 Therefore, when we could not stand it any longer, we thought that it would be good to be alone in Athens 2and to send Timothy, our brother and God’s minister in the Good News of Christ, so that he might confirm and comfort you in your faith, 3and that no one would be shaken by these afflictions.
 For you know that these must come our way.
 4This is certain, a b Or “as young children” Some manuscripts omit “Christ” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 446 and when we were with you, we told you in advance that we must suffer affliction.
 And this is what happened, as you know.
 5For this reason, when I could not stand it any longer, I sent Timothya so that I might know your faith, fearing that in some way the tempter may have tempted you, so that our labor would have been in vain.
 6But Timothy came back from his visit to you and brought us glad news of your faith and love.
 He mentioned your abiding good memories of us as well as your longing to see us just as we also long to see you.
 7Through all this, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our distress and affliction through your faith.
 8Now we have revived, since you stand fast in the Lord! 9What thanksgiving can we give back to God for you, for all the joy you give us to experience before our God? 10Yes, night and day, I pray intensely so that we may see you again and make perfect what is lacking in your faith.
 11Now, may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you.
 12May the Lord grant you to increase and overflow in love one for each other and for everyone, even as we also do for you.
 13And may the Lordb establish your hearts blameless in holiness before our God and Father even to the end, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.
 4 Exhortations - Brotherly love As for other matters, brethren, we beg and exhort you in the Lord Jesus: as you received from us how you should live to please God, do so even more! 2Certainly, you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
 3This is the will of God: your sanctification, and that you abstain from sexual immorality.
 4Each one of you should know how to practice self-control of the body in sanctification and honor, 5not in lustful passions, as Gentiles who do not know God.
 6No one should take advantage of or wrong a brother [or sister] in this matter, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as also we warned you and testified to you.
 7Truly, God did not call us for impurity but to sanctification! 8Therefore, whoever rejects this does not reject a human [command] but God, who has also given you his Holy Spirit.
 9But concerning brotherly love, you have no need that anyone should write to you since you have learned from God how to love one another, 10and this is what you do toward all the brethren who are throughout Macedonia.
 Yet, we exhort you, brethren, to overflow even more! 11Make it your goal to lead a quiet life, to take care of your own affairs, and to work with your a b Greek “him” Greek “he” TO THE THESSALONIANS 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΕΙΣ Α own hands, even as we instructed you.
 12Thus, you will live properly in the sight of those who are ‘outside’ and you will lack nothing.
 Hope for Christians who have died 13We do not want you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning those who have fallen asleep, so that you may not grieve like those have no hope do.
 14For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, in the same way God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in Jesus.
 15We tell you the following by the word of the Lord: we who are alive and remain until the coming of the Lord will not precede those who have fallen asleep.
 16For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trumpet of God.
 The dead in Christ will rise first, 17then we who are alive and remain will be caught upa together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.
 And so, we will always be with the Lord.
 18Therefore, comfort one another with these words.
 5 The Lord comes like a thief in the night But concerning the times and seasons, brethren, you have no need that anything be written to you.
 2You know well that the day of the Lord comes like a thief in the night.
 3When people say, “Peace and safety,” then a sudden destruction will come upon them, like birth pains on a pregnant woman, and they will by no means escape.
 4As for you, brethren, you are not in darkness to allow the day to overtake you like a thief.
 5You are all children of light, and children of the day.
 We do not belong to the night, or to the darkness.
 6Therefore, let us not sleep as others do, but let us watch and be clear minded.
b 7Those who sleep, sleep in the night, and those who are drunk are drunk in the night.
 8But since we belong to the day, let us be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and as a helmet, the hope of salvation.
 9God did not appoint us to wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ 10who died for us, so that whether we wake or sleep,c we should live together with him.
 11Therefore, encourage one another and build each other up, which is what you [already] do.
 a Greek a`rpaghso,meqa (see note on Philippians 2:5) – Latin Vulgate has “rapiemur” from which the English word “rapture” is derived.
 b Or “sober,” as in verse 8 c The biblical expression for being (physically) dead THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 448 Life in the Church 12Now, we beg you, brethren, to recognizea those who work hard among you, who are set over you in the Lord and who admonish you.
 13Respect and honor them in love because of their work.
 Be at peace among yourselves.
 14We exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly, encourage the fainthearted,b support the weak, be patient toward all.
 15See that no one returns evil for evil to anyone, but always pursue what is good, both for one another and for all.
 16Rejoice always! 17Pray without ceasing! 18Give thanks in everything because this is God’ will in Christ Jesus for you.
 19Do not quench the Spirit! 20Do not despise prophesies! 21Test all things, and hold firmly to what is good! 22Abstain from every form of evil! 23May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely.
 May your whole spirit, soul, and body be preserved blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
 24He who calls you is faithful and he will carry this out.
 25Brethren, pray for us.
 26Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss.
 27I solemnly instruct you by the Lord that this letter should be read to all the holy brethren.
 28The a b grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you! Amen.
 Or “know / respect / be considerate to” Or “those who lack courage” TO THE THESSALONIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΕΙΣ B 2 THESSALONIANS (ΠΡΟΣ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΕΙΣ Β) 1 Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy: to the Church of the Thessalonians in God our Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ.
 2Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
 3We are bound to always give thanks to God for you, brethren, as it is fitting, because your faith is growing wonderfully and your mutual love for all is overflowing.
 4Therefore, in the Churches of God, we boast about you for your patience, faith in all your persecutions and for the afflictions which you endure.
 5This is an obvious sign of the righteous judgment of God, so that you may be accounted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which you too suffer.
 6It is righteous for God to repay with affliction those who afflict you 7and to give relief to you who are afflicted with us.
 This will be when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire, 8bringing vengeance to those who do not know God and to those who do not obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus.
 9They will pay the penalty of eternal destruction from the facea of the Lord and from the glory of his power, 10when he comes to be glorified in his holy onesb and to be admired among all those who have believed (because our testimony to you was believed) in that Day.
 11With this in mind, we also pray always for you, so that our God may account you worthy of your calling and fulfill with power [your] every desire of goodness and work of faith.
 12May the Name of our Lord Jesus Christc be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
 2 Apostasy and the man of sin Now, brethren, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering to him,d we ask you 2not to be quickly shaken in your mind.
 Do not be troubled by a prophecy, report or letter allegedly from us, saying a Or “presence” Or “saints” c Some manuscripts lack “Christ” d See 1 Thessalonians 4:16-18 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 450 that the day of Christ has come.
 3Let no one deceive you in any way! This will not take place unless the apostasy comes first and the man of sina is revealed, the son of destruction.
 4He opposes and exalts himself over all that is called God or that is an object of religion to take his seat as God in the sanctuary of God, presentingb himself as a god! 5Do you not remember that, when I was still with you, I told you these things? 6Now, you knowc what is restraining him, so that he may be revealed in his own time.
 7The mystery of lawlessness is already at work!d But now, there is one who restrains,e until he is taken out of the way.
 8Then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord will kill with the breath of his mouth and destroy by the manifestation of his coming.
 9The coming [of the lawless one] is according to Satan’s operation with all kinds of power, miracles and lying wonders,f 10and with all deception of wickedness aimed at those who are being lost, because they did not receive the love of the truth so that they might be saved.
 11Because of this, God sends them a strong delusion so that they should believe a lie 12and those who did not believe the truth but had pleasure in unrighteousness shall all be judged.
 13Nevertheless, we must always give thanks to God for you, brethren beloved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginningg for salvation through the sanctifying work of the Spirit and through beliefh in the truth.
 14Indeed, he called you through our Good News to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
 15And so, brethren, stand firm and keep the traditions which we taught you, whether by word or by letter.
 16May our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, who loved us and gave us eternal consolation and good hope through grace, 17comfort your hearts and establish you in every good work and word.
 a CT reads “man of lawlessness” Or “proclaiming, claiming” c This is an oral tradition known the Thessalonians but about which we have no assured knowledge.
 d Compare 1 John 2:18-22 e Two common possibilities for the identity of the restrainer are the Holy Spirit and the Roman Empire.
 This second view was favored by St.
 John Chrysostom; and Orthodox Christians note that the Roman Empire ended in 1453, and in an extended sense in 1917.
 Others have proposed James (of Jerusalem – this seems to be Eusebius’ interpretation when he writes “James himself the first bishop there, the one who is called the brother of the Lord, were still alive, and dwelling in Jerusalem itself, remained the surest bulwark of the place” in HE 3.
7) or John (the Apostle) for this role.
 f Compare Revelation 13:13 g CT reads “as [the] first-fruits” h Or “faith” b TO THE THESSALONIANS 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΕΙΣ B 3 Request for prayers – Against those who refuse to work As for other matters, brethren, pray for us, so that the word of the Lord may spread rapidly and be glorified, just as it is with you.
 2Pray also that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men, for not all have faith.
 3Still, the Lord is faithful; he will establish you and guard you from the evil one.
 4We have confidence in the Lord concerning you, that you accomplish and will continue to accomplish the things which we command.
 5May the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the endurance of Christ.
 6Now we command you, brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw yourselves from every brother [or sister] who walks in rebellion, and not after the tradition which they received from us.
 7You know how you should imitate us: we did not behave as rebels among you 8and we did not eat bread from anyone’s hand without paying for it.
 We were in labor and hardship, working night and day, so that we might not burden any of you.
 9It is not because we do not have this right, but we wanted to be an example to you so that you might imitate us.
 10For even when we were with you, we gave you this instruction: “Anyone who will not work should not eat either.
” 11Yet, we hear about some among you who live in rebellion, not working at all but interfering with other people’s lives.
 12In the Lord Jesus Christ, we command and exhort those who live this way to work quietly and to eat their own bread.
 13But you, brethren, do not grow tired of doing what is good.
 14Take note of those who do not obey our worda in this letter: suspend your fellowship [with them] to bring them to shame.
 15Do not consider such a person as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
 16Now, may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times in every way.
 May the Lord be with you all! 17This is my greeting, Paul, with my own hand! This is the sign {of authenticity} in every letter: this is my handwriting.
 18May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all! Amen.
 a Or “message” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 452 1 TIMOTHY (ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ Α) 1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according to the commandment of God our Savior, and Christ Jesus our hope; 2to Timothy, my true child in faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
 A different doctrine 3As I urged you when I was going into Macedonia, stay at Ephesus in order to command certain individuals not to teach a different doctrine 4or to pay attention to myths and endless genealogies.
 These are a cause of disputesa rather than God’s stewardship,b which is in faith.
 5The goal of this instruction is love, out of a pure heart, a good conscience and a sincere faith.
 6But some have wandered away from these things, missing the mark and turning to vain discussions.
c 7They desire to be teachers of the law, although they do not understand what they are talking about, or what it is that they so strongly affirm.
 8We know that the law is good, if it is used properly.
d 9As it is, we know that the law is not made for the righteous but for the unrighteous and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and irreligious, for murderers of fathers and mothers, [even] for murderers! 10The law is for the sexually immoral, for homosexuals, slavetraders, liars, perjurers and for those who practice anything else contrary to the sound doctrine 11which is in accordance with the Good News of the glory of the blessed God, which was entrusted to me.
 Gratitude for God’s mercy 12I give thanks to Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me, because he has considered me faithful and has appointed me to [this] ministry,e 13even though I used to be a blasphemer, a persecutor and disrespectful.
 Nevertheless, I obtained mercy because I did those things in ignorance and unbelief; 14and so the grace of our Lord overflowed [onto me along] with faith and love in Christ Jesus.
 a CT reads “speculation” TR reads “building up” c Or “empty talk” d Or “lawfully, according to rules, legitimately” e Or “service” b TO TIMOTHY 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ Α 15This saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance: that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners of whom I am the first.
a 16This is how I obtained mercy, so that in me as ‘the first,’ Jesus Christ might show all his patience as an example for those who would believe in him for eternal life.
 17Now, to the eternal King,b immortal, invisible, to God who alone is wise, be honor and glory unto ages of ages.
c Amen.
 Instruction to Timothy 18I commit this instruction to you, my child Timothy, according to the prophecies made earlier which singled you out.
 By them, may you fight the good fight, 19keeping the faith and a good conscience.
 Some have rejectedd these and made a shipwreck of the faith, 20including Hymenaeus and Alexander.
 I delivered them to Satane so that they might learn not to blaspheme.
 2 A call to prayer Therefore, I encourage that first of all, petitions, prayers, intercessions and thanksgivings be made for all: 2for kings and all in high places, so that we may lead a quiet and peaceful life in all godliness and piety.
f 3Indeed, this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior 4who desires all people to be saved and to come to the full knowledge of the truth.
 5There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 6who gave himself as a ransomg for all - this testimony [was given] in its own times.
 7I was appointed a preacher and an apostle of these things (I am telling the truth in Christ, not lying), a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
 8I desire, therefore, that in every place, the men should pray, lifting up holy handsh without anger or doubting.
 9In the same way, women should wear decent clothing, modest and fitting, without elaborate hairstyle, gold, a See Prayer before Communion: “I believe O Lord and I confess that you are truly the Christ, the Son of the Living God (Matthew 16:16), who came into the world to save sinners of whom I am the first” b Compare Tobit 13:7,11 c Greek tou.
j aivw/naj tw/n aivw,nwn d Or “neglected” e An expression that probably indicates excommunication, a reversal of baptism which is a public renunciation of Satan “with all his pomp and angels” f Compare with the prayer after the epiclesis in the Liturgy of St.
 John Chrysostom g Greek avnti,lutron h Lifting the hands in prayer is an important apostolic tradition for public prayer.
 In modern liturgical practice, it is usually only observed by the presbyter.
 In some parishes, this custom is still observed during the Lord’s Prayer.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 454 pearls, or expensive clothing, 10but with good works (which is fitting for women professing godliness).
 11Let a woman learn in quietness, with all submission.
 12I do not allow a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man, but to be silent; 13because Adam was first formed, then Eve.
 14Adam was not deceived, but the woman, being deceived, fell into disobedience.
 15However, women will be saved through childbearing, as they remain in faith, love and sanctifying self-restraint.
a 3 Offices in the Church This is a sure word: if a man aspires to the office of overseer, he desires a good work.
 2The overseer must be irreproachable, husband of one wife, self-controlled, sensible, modest, hospitable and a good teacher.
 3He must not be a drinker; or someone violent or greedy for money.
b He should be gentle, not irritable or envious.
 4He should be someone who rules his own house well, keeping his [own] children in subjection with all reverence.
 5(Indeed, if a man does not know how to rule his own house, how can he take care of the Church of God?) 6He should not be a new convert, for fear that being puffed up with pride he may fall into the same condemnation as the devil.
 7Moreover, he must have good testimony from those who are outside in order to avoid falling into [public] blame and the snare of the devil.
 8Deacons, in the same way, must be reverent, not double-tongued, not addicted to much wine and not greedy for money.
 9They should keep the mystery of the faith with a pure conscience.
 10Let them also be tested first; then let them servec if they are blameless.
 11Likewise, their wivesd must be reverent, not slanderers but self-controlled and faithful in all things.
 12Deacons should be husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.
 13Those who have served welle earn for themselves a good standing and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
 The mystery of godliness - The pillar and foundation of the truth 14I write to you these things, hoping to come to you shortly.
 15If I am delayed, I want you to know how the people should behave in the house of a Greek swfrosu,nhj Or “dishonest gain.
” CT omits this clause.
 c Or “serve as deacons” d Literally “the women / the wives” as a possible reference to “deaconesses,” noting the fact that St.
 Paul has no requirements for the wife of the episkopos.
 However, this is unlikely in the context of the following verse.
 e Or “served well as deacons” b TO TIMOTHY 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ Α God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
 16Without a doubt, great is the mystery of godliness: Goda was revealed in the flesh, vindicated in [the] spirit,b seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the world, and received up in glory.
 4 Doctrines of demons – False asceticism The Spirit clearly says that in the last times, some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons 2through the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron.
 3They forbid marriage and command to abstain from foods which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.
 4Everything that God has created is good and nothing is to be rejected, if it is received with thanksgiving.
 5Indeed, it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.
 Advice for Timothy 6If you instruct the brethren of these things, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, nourished in the words of the faith and by the good doctrine which you have [always] followed.
 7Reject profane and old wives’ fables.
 Train yourself for godliness.
 8Physical exercise has some value, but godliness has value in all things, having a promise for the present life as well as for the one to come.
 9This saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance.
 10For this purpose, we work hard and experience rejection,c because we have placed our trust in the living God who is the Savior of all, especially of those who believe.
 11Command and teach these things.
 12Let no one despise your youth, but be an example for those who believe: in speech, in your way of life, in love, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.
 13Until I come, devote yourself to public reading, encouragement and teaching.
 14Do not neglect the gift that is in you, which was given to you by prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the council of presbyters.
d 15Be attentive in these things.
 Give yourself to them completely, so that your progress may be manifest to all.
 16Watch yourself and your teaching.
 a CT reads “He was revealed in the flesh…” PT reads “God.
” Original reading is debated.
 Or possibly “entered the divine sphere in spirit” or “was vindicated in the spiritual realm” c Or “are rejected” - CT reads “strive” d Greek presbuteri,ou - see Appendix A b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 456 Continue in these things! In doing so, you will save both yourself and those who hear you.
 5 Relationships in the Church – About widows Do not [sharply] rebuke an older man, but exhort him as a father; the younger men as brothers; 2older women as mothers; the younger as sisters, in all purity.
 3Honor widows who are truly widows.
 4But if any widow has children or grand-children, let them first learn how to carry out their religious duty towards their own family, and to repay their parents.
 This is good anda acceptable in the sight of God.
 5Those who are truly widows and abandonedb are the ones who have placed their hope in God and who persevere in petitions and prayers night and day.
 6But those who live in luxury are dead even as they live.
 7Give strict orders regarding these matters, so that they may be without reproach.
 8If anyone does not provide for his own, especially his own household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever! 9Only widows who are more than sixty years old and who were married to one man should be enrolled as widows.
 10They should be approved by good works: having brought up children, been hospitable to strangers, washed the saints’ feet, relieved the afflicted, and pursued every good work with attention.
 11On the other hand, do not enroll younger widows: when they are overcome by their sensual inclinations more than by Christ, they desire to marry.
 12They thus fall under condemnation because they have rejected their first pledge {to remain among the widows}.
 13Besides, they get into the habit of being idle and go about from house to house.
 They are not only idle but also gossips and busybodies, saying things which they should not.
 14Therefore, I think it best that the younger widows should get married, bear children and manage their homes; this will give the enemy no opportunity for slander.
 15For already some have strayed to follow Satan.
 16Believers who have widows among their close relatives should take care of them.
 Do not allow the Church to be burdened so that it might relieve [only] those who are truly widows.
 Guidelines pertaining to presbyters 17Presbyters who rule well should be accounted worthy of double honor,c especially those who work hard in preaching and teaching.
 18As the a Other ancient manuscripts lack “good and” Or “desolate / left alone” c Perhaps “double compensation” b TO TIMOTHY 1 - ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ Α Scripture says, “You shall not muzzle the ox when it treads out the grain,”a and, “The laborer is worthy of his wages.
”b 19Do not receive an accusation against a presbyter, except at the word of two or three witnesses.
c 20Reprove those who have sinned in the sight of all, so that the others may also be in fear.
 21I command you in the sight of God and Christ Jesus, and the elect angels: observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing with partiality.
 22Do not lay your hands hastily on anyone and do not be a participant in someone else’s sins.
 Keep yourself pure.
 23Do not drink only water but use a little wine for your stomach and because of your frequent illnesses.
 24The sins of some people are obvious long before they come to judgment while others are discovered only later.
 25Likewise, good works are obvious, and even those that are not cannot remain hidden.
 6 Rules for slaves Those who are under the yoke of slavery should consider their masters worthy of all honor, so that God’s Name and our doctrined may not be brought into disrepute.
 2Slaves whose masters are believers should not despise them because they are brethren.
 Rather, they should them serve them because those who have a share in the benefit [of their work] are believing and beloved.
 Teach and exhort these things.
 Doctrinal contentions - The love of money 3If anyone teaches a different doctrine and does not agree with the sound teachings of our Lord Jesus Christ and with the doctrine of godliness, 4such a person is conceited, ignorant, obsessed with arguments, controversies and disputes over words.
 These things result in envy, conflict, insults, evil suspicions, 5and constant antagonism between people whose minds are corrupt and devoid of truth, (people who treat religion as a means of gain).
 Withdraw yourself from such people.
e 6Godliness,f in fact, brings great gain if one is content.
 7Indeed, we brought nothing into the world, and we certainly cannot carry anything out! 8But if we have food and clothing, let us be content with that.
 9Those who are determined to become rich fall into a temptation and a snare with many a Deuteronomy 25:4 LXX Luke 10:7; Leviticus 19:13 c See Appendix A d Or “teaching, instruction” (Greek didaskali,a) e CT omits “withdraw yourself from such people.
” f Or “devotion / piety / religion” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 458 senseless and harmful lusts which plunge them into ruin and destruction.
 10Truly, the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil.
 Some have been led astray from the faith in their greed and they have pierced themselves with many sorrows.
 The good fight of faith 11But you, man of God, flee these things! Pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and gentleness.
 12Fight the good fight of faith! Hang on to the eternal life to which you were called when you made your good profession [of faith] in the sight of many witnesses.
 13Before God, who gives life to all things and before Christ Jesus, who bore witness before Pontius Pilate to this good confession, I charge you 14to keep the commandment undefiled and blameless until the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ 15which in due time God will reveal.
 To him who is the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings,a and Lord of lords, 16alone possessing immortality and dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no one has seen, nor can see: to him be honor and eternal power.
 Amen.
 Instructions for the wealthy - Conclusion 17Instruct those who are rich in this present world that they should not be proud or place their hope on uncertain riches but on the living God who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.
 18Teach them to do good, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute and willing to share.
 19In this way they will store up for themselves a good foundation for the future and take hold of eternalb life.
 20Timothy, guard what has been committed to you! Turn away from worldly and empty discussions as well as from the contradiction of the (falsely) so-called knowledge.
 21Those who have embraced this have wandered from the faith! Grace be with you! Amen.
 a Compare 2 Maccabees 13:4; 3 Maccabees 5:35 (The title “King of kings” does not appear as a title for God in the Hebrew Old Testament.
 Instead, it is used of Artaxerxes (Ezra 7.
12) and Nebuchadnezzar (Ezekiel 26:7 and Daniel 2:37).
 See also Revelation 17:14.
 b CT reads “true / real life” TO TIMOTHY 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ B 2 TIMOTHY (ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ B) 1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, according to the promise of the life which is in Christ Jesus; 2to Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace [be with you] from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
 3I give thanks to God to whom I offer divine servicea as my forefathers did, and with a pure conscience.
 I always remember you in my petitions, night and day, 4longing to see you, remembering your tears, so that I may be filled with joy.
 5I also remember your sincere faith which first dwelt in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice.
 I am convinced [that it dwells] in you also! Timothy’s gift 6For this reason, I am reminding you to rekindle the gift of God which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
 7For God did not give us a spirit of fear, but of power, love, and self-control.
 8Therefore, do not be ashamed to be a witness of our Lord or ashamed of me his prisoner.
 Share in my tribulations for the sake of the Good News, by the power of God.
 9He saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal.
b 10This has now been revealed by the manifestationc of our Savior Christ Jesus who abolished death and brought to light [both] life and immortality through the Good News.
 11For this, I was appointed as a herald, apostle and teacher of the Gentiles.
 12That is why I am suffering as I am! Yet I am not ashamed because I know him in whom I have believed and I am persuaded that he is able to protectd what I have committed to him until that Day.
 13Hold to the patterne of sound teachings which you have heard from me, with faith and love in Christ Jesus.
 14With the help of the Holy Spirit who dwells in us, guard the good deposit that was entrusted to you.
 a Greek latreu,w Greek ro.
 cro,nwn aivwni,wn c Greek evpifanei,aj d Or “guard / keep / preserve” e Or “example / standard” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 460 15As you know, all who are in Asia have turned away from me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes.
 16May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my imprisonment.
 17When he was in Rome, he searched hard for me and he found me! 18May the Lord grant him to find the Lord’s mercy in that Day, for he served [me] at Ephesus in many ways, as you know very well.
 2 Timothy’s tribulations and commission You, my child, be strengthened in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
 2What you heard from me among many witnesses, entrust likewise to faithful men who will be able to teach others as well.
 3You too must endure tribulations as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
 4No soldier on duty entangles himself in the affairs of this life in order to be able to please the one who enrolled him as a soldier.
 5Likewise, anyone who competes in athletics cannot be crowned unless he has competed by the rules.
 6The farmers who labor must be the first to get a share of the crops.
 7Think over what I have said, and may the Lord give you understanding in all things.
 8Remember my Good News: Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, of the seed of David.
 9Because of this I suffer tribulations to the point of being in chains as a criminal.
 However, God’s worda is not chained! 10Therefore, I endure all things for the sake of the elect, so that they may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus and with it eternal glory.
 11This saying is sure: For if we died with him, we will also live with him.
 If we endure, we will also reign with him.
 If we deny him, he also will deny us.
 13 If we are faithless, he remains faithful; He cannot deny himself.
 14Remind the people of these things, warning them in the sight of the Lord that they should not argue about words: this profits nothing and it brings ruin to those who listen.
 15Work hard to present yourself as approved by God, as a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth.
 16Stay away from godless empty discussions because those involved in it will become more and more ungodly.
 17Their word will consume like gangrene! Some of them are Hymenaeus and Philetus; 18they are in error concerning the truth, saying that the resurrection is already pastb and they bring some people’s a b Or “message” Or “has already taken place” TO TIMOTHY 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ B faith to ruin 19However, God’s firm foundation stands, having this seal, “The Lord knows those who are his,”a and, “Let every one who calls upon the Name of the Lordb depart from unrighteousness.
” 20Now, in a large house, there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and clay.
 Some are for an honorable use and some for a dishonorable use.
 21Therefore, if anyone purges himself from these things, he will be a vessel for honor, sanctified and suitable for the master’s use, prepared for every good work.
 22Flee from youthful lusts! Pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace with those who call on the Lord from a pure heart.
 23Reject foolish and ignorant questionings because you know that they result in conflict.
 24The Lord’s servant must not be argumentative but gentle towards all, able to teach and patient! 25In gentleness, he should correct those who oppose him: perhaps God will give them the repentance that leads to a full knowledge of the truth.
 26Thus, they may return to their senses and escape the snare of the devil (who had taken them captive to his will).
 3 Troubled times in the last days, But know that in the last days, troubled times will come.
 2People will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful and unholy.
 3[They will be] without natural affection, unforgiving, slanderers, without self-control, brutal, no lovers of good, 4treacherous, stubborn, self-important, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God; 5having an appearance of godliness but having rejected its [inner] meaning.
c Stay away from these people too.
 6Indeed, some of these creep into houses and captivate gullible women who are burdened with sins, led away by various lusts, 7always learning yet never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
 8Even as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, these people also oppose the truth.
 They are mentally corrupted and as far as the faith is concerned, they are rejected.
 9But they will not go very far because their folly will be obvious to all, as in the case of Jannes and Jambres.
 Paul’s example 10You, however, have paid close attention to my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, steadfastness, 11persecutions, and sufferings.
 You know what happened to me at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra.
 I endured those a Compare Numbers 16:5.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT TR reads “Christ” instead of “the Lord.
” EOB main text does not follow TR in this case.
 c Or “power / significance” (du,nami) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 462 persecutions and the Lord delivered me out of them all! 12Yes, all those who desire to lead godly lives in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
 13But wicked impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving others, being themselves deceived.
 14As for you, remain in what you have learned which is what you firmly believe, knowing from whom you have learned them.
 15From infancy, you have known the Holy Scripturesa which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus.
 16Every Scripture is God-breathedb andc profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction and for instruction in righteousness, 17so that the man of God may be fully qualified, completely equippedd for every good work.
 4 A charge to preach the word Before God and the Lord Jesus Christ who will judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, I charge you to 2preach the word.
 Welcome or unwelcome, insist on it; reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with complete patience and instruction.
 3Indeed, the time will come when people will not listen to the sound doctrine, but, having itching ears, they will gather around them teachers who agree with their own lusts.
 4They will turn away their ears from the truth and turn to fables.
 5As for you, be sober in all things, endure hardship, do the work of one who proclaims the Good News and fulfill your ministry.
 Paul announces his end – His loneliness 6As for me, I am already being offered in sacrifice, and the time of my releasee has come.
 7I have fought the good fight! I have finished the course! I have kept the faith! 8From now on, the crown of righteousnessf is reserved for me, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me on that Day, and not only to me but also to all those who have loved his appearing.
 9Do your utmost to visit me soon, 10because Demas, having loved this present world, has left me and went to Thessalonica.
 Crescens went to Galatia and Titus to Dalmatia.
 11Only Luke is still with me.
 Bring Mark along with you because he is helpful to me for service.
 12I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
 13When you come, bring the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, as wells as the books,g especially the parchments.
 14Alexander, a In the case of Timothy, a clear reference to the Septuagint Or “inspired” (qeo,pneustoj) c Or possibly “very writing inspired by God is…” d See EOB Introduction (Volume 1) for a discussion of the issues of canonicity and sufficiency.
 e Or “departure” (Greek avnalu,sew,j) f Compare Wisdom 5:16 g Greek ta.
 bibli,a b TO TIMOTHY 2 - ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ B the metalworker did much evil to me.
 The Lord will repay him according to his works.
 15Beware of him, for he greatly opposed our teachings.
 16At my first defense, no one came to help me, but all left me.
 May it not be held against them! 17Still, the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and heard by all the Gentiles.
 I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion 18and the Lord will deliver me from every evil work and preserve me for his heavenly Kingdom.
 To him be the glory now and unto ages of ages! Amen.
 Final greeting 19Greet Prisca, Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
 20Erastus remained at Corinth, but I left Trophimus at Miletus sick.
 21Do your best to come before winter.
 Eubulus greets you, as well as Pudens, Linus, Claudia and all the brethren.
 22May the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit! Grace be with you.
 Amen.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 464 TITUS (ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΤΟΝ) 1 Paul, a servanta of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ [appointed] to bring God’s elect to faith and to the knowledge of the truth which leads to godliness, 2and also to the hope of eternal life, which God who cannot lie promised before the age began.
 3In his own time, he revealed his word in the message I was entrusted with according to the commandment of God our Savior.
 4To Titus, my true child according to the faith which we share: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
 Titus’ commission in Crete – Requirement for Church offices 5I left you in Crete for this reason: that you would set in order the things that were amissb and appoint presbytersc in every city, as I directed you: 6someone who is blameless, the husband of one wife, whose children believe and not accused of loose or unruly behavior.
 7Indeed, the overseer must be beyond reproach, as God’s steward; not self-pleasing, not easily angered, not someone who abuses wine, not violent and not greedy for dishonest gain.
 8Instead, he should be hospitable, a lover of what is good, sensible, just, holy and self-controlled; 9holding fast to the sure word which is in harmony with what has been taught, so that he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine and to refute those who contradict.
 10There are also many who are rebellious,d vain talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision, 11whose mouths must be stopped.
 These men upset entire families, teaching things they should not [teach], doing it for sordid gain.
 12One of them, one of their own prophets, said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and lazy gluttons.
” 13This testimony is true! For this reason, rebuke them sharply, so that they may be sound in the faith, 14not paying attention to Jewish fables and human commandments which distracte from the truth.
 15To the pure, all things are pure; but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but a Or “slave” Or “lacking / defective” c See Appendix A d Or “unruly / disobedient men” e Or “turn away” b TO TITUS - ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΤΟΝ both their mind and their conscience are defiled.
 16They profess to know God, but by their works they deny him, being detestable, disobedient, and unfit for any good work.
 2 What Titus should teach Proclaim what is consistent with sound doctrine: 2that older men should be temperate, sensible, sober-minded, sound in faith, love and patience.
 3Likewise, older women should be reverent in behavior, not malicious gossips, nor addicted to much wine but teachers of what is good.
 4They should instruct the young women to love their husbands, to love their children, 5to be sober-minded, chaste, to work in the home, [and to be] kind.
 Young women should be in subjection to their own husbands, so that God’s word may not be disgraced.
 6Likewise, exhort the younger men to be sober-minded.
 7Be an example of good works in all things.
 In your teaching, show integrity, seriousness, incorruptibility 8and soundness of speech that is irreproachable.
 This way, those who oppose you will be ashamed, having nothing bad to say about us.
 9Exhort servantsa to be in subjection to their own masters and well-pleasing in all things.
 They should not be argumentative; 10they should not be stealing, but [instead be] trustworthy, so that they may make the doctrine of God our Savior attractive in every way.
 11Truly, the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all.
 12It has taught us that we should deny what is ungodly and worldly lusts, that we should live soberly, righteously, and in a godly way in this present world; 13waiting for the blessed hope: the appearingb of the glory of our great God and Saviorc Jesus Christ.
 14He gave himself for us in order to redeem us from all iniquity and to purify for himself a people for his own possession, zealous for good works.
 15Teach these things, exhort and reprove with complete authority.
 Let no one despise you! 3 Remind the people to be submissive to rulers and authorities, to be obedient and ready for every good work, 2not speaking evil of anyone and not contentious.
 They should also be gentle, showing great humility toward everyone.
 3Indeed, we used to be foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and a Or “slaves” Greek “epiphany” c This is the preferred liturgical expression.
 Some translations have “of our Great God and [of the] Savior Jesus Christ” which is also possible and consistent with the similar construction in 1:4.
 St.
 John Chrysostom makes explicit reference to this text to establish that Christ is indeed called theos (PNF Volume 13, p.
 207).
 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 466 hating one another.
 4But when the kindness of God our Savior and his love toward mankind appeared, 5(not by works of righteousness, which we did ourselves, but according to his mercy), he saved us through the washing of regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit.
 6Yes, God richly poured out this Spirit on us, through Jesus Christ our Savior, 7so that being justified by his grace, we become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
 8This saying is sure.
 Concerning these things, I desire that you teach with confidence, so that those who have believed God may be careful to persevere in good works.
 These things are good and profitable to all.
 9Avoid foolish questions, genealogies, dissensions and disputes about the law.
 These things are unprofitable and vain.
 10After a first and second admonition, have nothing more to do with anyone who causes divisions,a 11knowing that such a person is perverted, sinful and self-condemned.
 Practical instructions and conclusion 12When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus, do your utmost to meet me at Nicopolis, for I have determined to spend the winter there.
 13Send Zenas, the lawyer, and Apollos on their journey speedily and see that they lack nothing.
 14Make sure that our people also learn to maintain good works to meet urgent needs, so that they may not be unfruitful.
b 15All who are with me greet you! Greet those who love us in faith.
 Grace be with you all! Amen.
 a The Greek word ai`retiko.
n actually implies the idea of ‘schismatic’ more than ‘heretic,’ although both ideas are closely related.
 b Or “unproductive” TO PHILEMON - ΠΡΟΣ ΦΙΛΗΜΟΝΑ PHILEMON (ΠΡΟΣ ΦΙΛΗΜΟΝΑ) 1 Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our beloved fellow-worker, 2to the beloveda Apphia, to Archippus, our fellowsoldier, and to the Church [that meets] in your house: 3Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
 4I thank my God always, making mention of you in my prayers, 5hearing of the love and faith which you have for the Lord Jesus and for all the saints.
 6I pray that your communion with us in the faith may become effective through the accurate knowledgeb of every good which is in us in Christ Jesus.
 7Indeed, we have much joy and comfort in your love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, brother.
 Paul’s entreaty to Philemon regarding Onesimus 8Therefore, even though I am bold enough in Christ to command you [to do] what is appropriate, 9yet for the sake of love, I would rather entreat - I, Paul, now elderly and a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
 10I beg you for my child Onesimus, whose father I have become in my imprisonment.
 11He was once useless to you, but now he is useful to both you and to me.
 12I am sending him back; therefore, receive him as my own heart! 13I desired to keep him with me so that on your behalf he might serve me in my chains for the Good News.
 14But I did not want to do anything without your consent: your goodness should not be forced but of free will.
 15Maybe it happened that he was separated from you for a while, so that you might have him forever, 16no longer as a slave, but more than a slave, as a beloved brother, especially to me and how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
 17If then you consider me in communionc with you, receive him as you would receive me.
 18However, if he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything, put that on my account.
 19I, Paul, write this with my own hand: I will pay it back (not to mention that you owe me even your own self).
 20Yes, brother, let me have joy from you in the Lord! Refresh my a CT reads “sister” Or “consciousness / recognition / awareness” - may also convey the idea of “experience” c Or “fellowship, partnership, close association” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 468 heart in the Lord! 21Having confidence in your obedience, I write [this letter] to you, knowing that you will do even beyond what I say.
 22Also, prepare a guest room for me, for I hope that through your prayers I will be restored to you.
 23Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you, 24as do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow-workers.
 25May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit! Amen.
 TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ HEBREWS (ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ) 1 God has spoken through his Son – The Son greater than the angels In the past, God spoke to the fathers through the prophets at many times and in various ways.
 2At the end of these days, he has spoken to us in his Son whom he has appointed heir of all things and through whom he [had] made the ages.
 3His Son is the radiance of his glory, the exact counterparta of his person,b upholding all things by the word of his power.
c When he had by himselfd made purification for our sins,e he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, 4having become much betterf than the angels as the Name he has inheritedg is superior to theirs.
 5For to which of the angels did God ever say: You are my Son! Today I have begotten youh and again: I will be a Father to him, and he will be a Son to me?i 6Also, when he brings the firstborn into the world, Godj says: “Let all the angels of God express adoration tok him.
”l 7Of a the angels, Goda says: The Greek carakth.
r conveys the idea of the imprint of seal in wax.
 Hypostasis conveys the idea of “person,” not “substance” (an alternative rendering) in Orthodox theology.
 c Compare this entire passage with Wisdom 7:25-26.
 Both use the rare Greek word avpau,gasma d CT omits “by himself” e A reference to the ritual of the day of atonement performed by the high priest f Or “superior / greater” g Compare Philippians 2:9-10 h Psalms 2:7 i 2 Samuel 7:14; 1 Chronicles 17:13 j Greek “he” k proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) l Deuteronomy 32:43.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 470 Who makes his angels spirits, and his servants a flame of fire;b The Son as the enthroned Messiah-King 8but of the Son he says: Your throne O Godc is unto ages of ages! The scepter of justice is the scepter of your Kingdom.
 9 You have loved righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness above your companions.
d The Son as eternal creator 10And: You, Lord, in the beginning, laid the foundation of the earth.
 The heavens are the works of your hands.
 11 They will perish, but you continue.
 They all will grow old as a garment,e 12 As a mantle, you will roll them up, and they will be changed; but you are the same.
 Your years will not fail.
f 13Indeed, to which of the angels did he ever say, Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet?g 14Are the angelsh not all ministering spirits, sent out to serve for the sake of those who will inherit salvation? a Greek “he” Psalms 104:4 / 103 LXX c There are instances where ho theos means “O God” (Heb.
 10:7), which is why this verse can properly be translated as indicated.
 St.
 John Chrysostom does argue that the Son is called ho theos in this verse (PNF Vol.
 14, p.
 376).
 However, it should be noted that the most statistically and linguistically probable reading is “Your throne is God, is unto ages of ages.
” d Psalms 45:6-7 / 44 LXX e NT agrees with LXX against MT f Psalms 102:25-27 / 101 LXX (these verses are applied to YHWH in the OT) g Psalms 110:1 / 109 LXX h Greek “they” b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ 2 Warning not to neglect salvation Therefore, we should pay greater attention to the things that we were taught, for fear that we may drift away.
 2Certainly, if the word spoken through angels proved reliable and every transgression and disobedience received a just penalty, 3how will we escape if we neglect so great a salvation! It was first announced by the Lord himself, and it is confirmed to us by those who heard him.
 4God also bore witness with them, both by signs and wonders, by various works of power and by gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to his own will.
 5Indeed, God did not subject the worlda to come (which we proclaim) to angels, 6but there is a place {in Scripture} where someone has testified: What is man that you should be concerned for him?b Or the son of man, that you care for him? 7 You made him a little lower than the angelsc.
 You crowned him with glory and honor.
d 8 You have put all things in subjection under his feet.
e Since God has subjected all things to him, he has left nothing that is not subject to him! But now, we do not see all things subjected to him, [at least not] yet.
 9However, we see him who has been made a little lower than the angels, [that is] Jesus, crowned with glory and honor because of the suffering of death, so that by the grace of Godf he should taste death forg everyone.
 Many children to glory 10Indeed, it was fitting for God, (for whom are all things and through whom are all things), in bringing many children to glory, to make the author of their salvation perfecth through sufferings.
 11For both the one who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from one; for this reason, hei is not ashamed to call them brethren, 12saying: a Greek oivkoume,nhn NT agrees with LXX against MT c Follows LXX; the Hebrew text has ‘elohim’ which could also be rendered as ‘gods’ d TR adds “and set him over the works of your hands” e Psalms 8:4-6 f A few ancient manuscripts read “so that apart from God he should…” This variant was noted by Origen and Jerome, but it is poorly attested and is almost certainly a transcriptional error.
 g Or “on behalf of” h Or “complete / fulfilled” i Jesus b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 472 I will declarea your Name to my brethren.
b In the midst of the congregation I will sing your praise.
c 13Again: I will put my trust in him,d and: Behold, here I am with the children whom God has given me.
e Christ’s humanity 14Since the children have shared in [the same] flesh and blood, he likewise shared the same [human nature], so that through death he might bring to nothing the one who had the power of death, the devil, 15and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to life-long slavery.
 16Certainly, Jesusf did not take on the [nature of] angels, but [that of] Abraham’s seed.
 17For this reason, he had to be made like his brethreng in all things, so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God,h {able} to make a sacrifice of atonement for the sins of the people.
 18Moreover, since he himself suffered and was tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted.
 3 A High Priest greater than Moses Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus, 2who was faithful to the one who had appointed him, just as Moses was faithful in all God’s house.
 3Yet, Jesus is accounted worthy of more glory than Moses, just as the builder of a house has more honor than the house! 4Every house is built by someone, but the one who built all things is God.
 5Moses indeed was a faithful servant in all of God’s house, as a testimony for what would later on be spoken about.
 6But Christ is faithful as a Son over his [own] house and we are his house, if we firmly hold on to the confidence and pride of our hope until the end.
i 7Therefore, even as the Holy Spirit says: a Or “proclaim / confess / acknowledge” NT agrees with LXX against MT c Psalms 22:22 / 21 LXX d Isaias (Isaiah) 8:17.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT e Isaias (Isaiah) 8:18 f Greek “he” g Or “brothers” h Or “in the service of God” i CT omits “to the end” b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ Today if you will hear his voice,a 8 do not harden your hearts, as in the rebellion, as in the day of the trial in the wilderness, 9 where your fathers tested me by proving me, and saw my works for forty years.
 10 Therefore, I was displeased with that generation and said, ‘They always go astray in their heart, they did not know my ways;’ 11 As I swore in my wrath, ‘They will not enter into my rest.
’b A warning based on the example of Israel 12Beware, brethren, for fear that one of you may have an evil and unbelieving heart that would fall away from the living God.
 13Instead, encourage one another day by day, as long as it is called “today,” for fear that one of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
 14For we have become partakers of Christ, if we hold on to our first confidence until the end, 15as long as these words apply: Today if you will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts, as in the rebellion.
c 16But who is it that rebelled when they heard? Were they not all those that Moses had led out of Egypt? 17With whom was Godd displeased for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose dead bodies fell in the wilderness? 18And to whom did he swear that they would not enter into his rest? Was it not to those who were disobedient? 19We see that they were not able to enter in because of [their] lack of faith.
e 4 God’s Sabbath rest Let us beware, then! Since the promise remains, let us be careful that none of you be found to have fallen short of it.
 2For we also had the Good News preached to us, just as them, but they gained nothing from the word they heard because those who heard did not combine it with faith.
 3However, we who have faith are entering into that rest, even as God said: a NT agrees with LXX against MT Psalms 95:7-11 / 94 LXX c Psalms 95:7-8 / 94 LXX d Greek “he” e Or “unbelief” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 474 As I swore in my wrath, they will not enter into my rest.
a And yet, the works were finished from the foundation of the world.
 [else], God said this about the seventh day: 4Somewhere God rested on the seventh day from all his works.
b 5And again: They will not enter into my rest.
c 6It remains the case, then, that there would be some people who would enter that rest, and those to whom the Good News was preached before failed to enter [it] because of [their] disobedience.
 7God has thus defined a certain day, “today,” saying through David much later, in the words already quoted: Today if you will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.
d 8If Joshuae had given them rest, Godf would not have afterward spoken of another day.
 9There must still be, then, a Sabbath rest for God’s people, 10and anyone who has entered into his rest has also rested from his [own] works, just as God did.
 11Therefore, let us do our utmost to enter into that rest, for fear that anyone should fall according to the same pattern of disobedience.
 12Indeed, the word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of joints and marrow, and it is able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
 13No creature is hidden from God’s sight, but all things are naked and open before the eyes of the one to whom we must give an account.
 A compassionate great high priest, tempted yet without sin 14Since we have such a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold on firmly to our confession.
 15Certainly, we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our infirmities, but one who has been tempted in all things just as we are, yet without sin.
 16Therefore, let us approach the throne of grace with boldness, so that we may receive mercy and find grace for assistance in time of need.
 a Psalms 95:11 / 94 LXX Genesis 2:2 c Psalms 95:11 / 94 LXX d Psalms 95:7-8 / 94 LXX e Greek VIhsou/j f Greek “he” b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ 5 A high priest after the order of Melchizedek Every high priest is selected from among men and is appointed for their sake in matters pertaining to God, so that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for [their] sins.
 2The high priest can deal gently with those who are ignorant and going astray since he himself is also subject to weakness.
 3Because of this, he must offer sacrifices for the sins of the people, as well as for himself.
 4Moreover, nobody assumes this honor by himself but one is called by God, just as Aaron was.
 5Likewise, Christ did not glorify himself to be made a high priest, but it was God who said to him: You are my Son: Today I have become your father.
a 6As he says also in another place: You are a priest forever, According to the order of Melchizedek.
b 7During his life on earth, Christc offered prayers and petitions with loud cries and tears to the one who could deliverd him from death, and he was heard because of his godly fear.
e 8Although he was a Son, he learned obedience through suffering.
 9Having been made perfect, he became to all those who obey him the cause of eternal salvation, 10appointed by God as a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
 Beyond the basics 11We have many things to say about these things but it is hard to explain because you have become slow at understanding.
 12For although by this time you should be teachers, you still need to have someone teach you [even] the basic principles of God’s oracles.
 You have come to need milk, and not solid food! 13Everyone who lives on milk is not experienced in the word of righteousness; such a person is a baby.
 14But solid food is for those who are fully grown, who have trained their senses to discern good and evil.
 a Psalms 2:7 Psalms 110:4 / 109 LXX c Greek “he” d Or “save / rescue” e Or “reverent submission” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 476 6 Therefore, going beyond the teaching of the basic principles about Christ, let us move on to perfection! Let us not lay again a foundation of repentance from dead works, of faith toward God, 2of the teaching of baptisms, of laying on of hands, of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
 3If God allows, this is what we shall do.
 4Regarding those who were once enlightened, who tasted of the heavenly gift, became partakers of the Holy Spirit, 5tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come, 6but then fell away, it is impossible to renew them again to repentance! They crucify the Son of God for themselves all over again and expose him to shame! 7On the other hand, the land which has absorbed the rain that comes often upon it and thus brings forth a crop suitable for those who till it; such a land receives blessing from God.
 8Yet, if it bears thorns and thistles, it is rejected, close to being cursed; and its end is to be burned.
 9But, beloved, even though we speak like this, we are persuaded of better things for you, of things that accompany salvation.
 10God is not unrighteous, so as to forget your work and the labor of love which you showed for his Name by serving the saints even as you still serve them.
 11We desire that each one of you may show the same zeal to the end, to [obtain] the fullness of hope.
 12Do not be sluggish but imitate those who through faith and patience have inherited the promises.
 God’s unchangeable oath 13When God made a promise to Abraham, since he could swear by no one greater, he swore by himself, 14saying, “I will surely bless and multiply you.
”a 15Thus, having patiently endured, Abraham obtained the promise.
 16Humans swear by someone greater and in every dispute they have the oath is final to get things settled.
 17In this way, being determined to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeable nature of his purpose, God intervened with an oath.
 18And so, by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, may we have a strong encouragement, since we have sought refuge and taken hold of the hope set before us.
 19We have this hope as an anchor of the soul, a hope which is both sure and solid.
 It reaches beyond the veil 20where as a forerunner Jesus has entered for us, having become a high priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.
 a Genesis 22:17 TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ 7 Melchizedek, Abraham and Christ This Melchizedek was king of Salem, priest of God Most High, who met Abraham when he was returning from the slaughter of the kings and who blessed him.
 2Moreover, Abraham gave a tenth part of all to this Melchizedek! By the interpretation of his name, he is, first, ‘king of saving justice’ and also king of Salem, that is, ‘king of peace;’ 3without father, mother or genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life.
 He was made like the Son of God and remains a priest for all times.
 4Now, consider how great this man was, since even the Patriarch Abraham gave him a tenth out from the best spoils! 5Indeed, the sons of Levi who receive the priestly office have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is, of their brethren, although they too are Abraham’s descendants.
 6But this man, who was not of the same descent, received tithes from Abraham and blessed him who has the promises! 7Now, nobody will question that the lesser is blessed by the greater.
 8Here, the tenth is collected by men who die; but in the other case, by him who is declared to be living.
 9We can say that through Abraham even Levi (who would [later] receive tithes), had paid tithes, 10for he was still ‘in the body’ of his ancestor when Melchizedek met him.
 11Now, if perfection had come through the Levitical priesthood (under which the people received the law), what further need would there be for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek and not that of Aaron? 12And as the priesthood is being changed, there is also, by necessity, a change in the law as well.
 13So our Lord,a of whom these things were said, belongs to another tribe, one from which no one has served at the altar.
 14It is clear indeed that our Lord came from the tribe of Judah, about which Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood.
 15This is even more obvious if after the likeness of Melchizedek, another priest was to rise, 16one who was not made in virtue of a law of physical descent but according to the power of an indestructible life.
 17As it is testified: You are a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.
b 18There is a cancellation of an earlier commandment on account of its weakness and uselessness, 19because the law made nothing perfect.
 Now, there is the introduction of a better hope through which we draw near to God.
 20Moreover, our Lordc was not made priest without the taking of an a Greek “he” Psalm 110:4 / 109 LXX c Greek “he” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 478 oath 21(although others became priests without any oath).
 But with an oath, God says of him: The Lord swore and will not change his mind, ‘You are a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.
’a 22Because of this, Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant.
 indeed, were made priests [in the past] because they are prevented from continuing in office when they die.
 24But because he lives forever, Jesusb holds a perpetualc priesthood.
 25Therefore, he is also able to save to the very end those who draw near to God through him, because he lives forever to make intercession for them.
 23Many, 26Indeed, such a high priest was fitting for us: holy, blameless, undefiled,d separated from sinners and made higher than the heavens.
 27He does not need, like those [former] high priests, to offer up sacrifices daily, first for his own sins and then for the sins of the people.
 Instead, he did this once for all, when he offered himself up.
 28For the law appoints as high priests men who have weaknesses, but the word of the oath which came after the law appoints forever a Son who has been perfected.
 8 Christ: high priest and mediator of a better covenant The point of what we are saying is this: we have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty on high, 2a servant of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has set up, not man.
 3Every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices.
 Therefore, it is necessary that this high priest should also have something to offer.
 4If the Jesuse were on earth, he would not be a priest at all, because there are priests who [still] offer gifts according to the law.
f 5They offer divine serviceg to a copy and a shadow of the heavenly things, even as Moses was warned by God when he was about to build the tabernacle.
 For God said: a Psalm 110:4 / 109 LXX.
 CT omits “according to the order of Melchizedek” Greek “he” c Or “permanent / untransferable” d The same Greek word is used in 13:4 e Greek “he” f This verse may indicate that Hebrews was written before 70 AD (but see also 9:6-8) g Greek latreu,ousin b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ Behold, you shall make everything according to the pattern that was shown to you on the mountain.
a 6But now, Jesusb has obtained a more excellent ministry as he is also the mediator of a better covenant, given as law on better promises.
 Old and new covenants 7If that first covenant had been without fault, there would have been no place to look for a second one.
 8But finding fault with them,c God said: Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; 9 not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; for they did not continue in my covenant, and I ignored them, says the Lord.
 10 This is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those days, says the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, I will also write them on their heart.
 I will be their God, and they will be my people.
 11 They will not [have to ] teach everyone his fellow-citizen,d and everyone his relative,e saying: ‘Know the Lord,’ for all will know me, from their least to their greatest.
 12 For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness; I will remember their sins and lawless deeds no more.
f 13By speaking of a new covenant, Godg has made the first one old.
 And what is becoming obsolete and ageing will soon disappear.
 a Exodus 25:40 Greek “he” c A reference to the people of Israel or to the promises and ordinances of the Law d TR reads “neighbor” instead of “fellow-citizen” e Or “brother” (Greek avdelfo.
n) f Jeremiah 31:31-34 g Greek “he” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 480 9 The first tabernacle Even the firsta tabernacle and covenant had ordinances of divine serviceb and an earthly sanctuary.
 2A tabernacle was set up: the lampstand, the table, and the show bread were in the first part which is called the Holy Place.
 3Beyond the second veil was found the tabernacle which is called the Holy of Holies.
 4It had a golden altar of incense and the Ark of the Covenant all covered with gold.
 The Ark contained a golden jar holding the manna, Aaron’s rod that budded and the tablets of the covenant.
 5Above it, cherubim of glory overshadowed the mercy seat, but now we cannot speak about these things in detail.
 6According to this arrangement, priests are continually enteringc the outer tabernacle, accomplishing the rites of offering divine service.
 7Into the second tabernacle, only the high priest enters, once in the year and withd blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins committed in ignorance by the people.
 8The Holy Spirit is indicating that the way into the Holy Place was not yet revealed, [at least] while the first tabernacle was still standing.
 9It is a figure of the present age, where the gifts and sacrifices that are offered are incapable, as far as conscience is concerned, to make the one who offers divine servicee perfect.
 10The reason is that they are only carnal ordinances (with meats, drinks and various washings), imposed until a time of reformation.
 Christ’s sacrifice 11But when Christ appeared as a high priest of the good things to come, he entered through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation.
 12It was not through the blood of goats and calves but through his own blood that he entered into the Holy Place once for all, having obtained eternal redemption.
 13Indeed, if the blood of goats and bulls, and the ashes of a heifer (sprinkling those who have been defiled) could sanctify to restore the purity of the flesh, 14how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spiritf offered himself without blemish to God, purify your conscience from dead works to offer divine service to the living God? 15For this reason, he is the mediator of a new covenant, since a death has occurred for the redemption of the sins that were under the first covenant, so that those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.
 16Where there is a last will a Other manuscripts omit “tabernacle” Greek latrei,aj c Present tense d Greek “not without” e Greek latreu,onta f Or “spirit” (Greek pneu,matoj aivwni,ou) b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ and testament, there must also be the death of the one who made it.
 17A will comes into effect after death; it is never in force while the one who made it is still alive.
 18That is why not even the first covenant was inaugurated without blood.
 19For when Moses had proclaimed every commandment to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and goats, with water, scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, 20saying: This is the blood of the covenant which God has commanded you.
a 21Moreover, he sprinkled the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry in the same way, with the blood.
 22According to the law, almost everything is purified with blood, and there is no remission [of sins] if there is no shedding of blood.
 23Therefore, it was necessary that the copies of the heavenly things should be cleansed with these things, but the heavenly things themselves [had to be purified] with better sacrificesb than these.
 24For Christ did not enter into holy places made with hands, which are representations of the true [holy places], but into heaven itself in order to appear in the presence of God for us.
 25Yet, this did not take place so that he would offer himself often, as the [Levitical] high priest does when he enters into the holy place year by year, with blood that is not his own.
 26Otherwise, Christc would have had to suffer often since the foundation of the world.
 But now, at the end of the ages, he has been revealed once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
 27It is appointed for humans to die once, and after this comes the judgment.
 28It is the same with Christ: having been offered once to bear the sins of many,d he will appear a second time, apart from sin-offering, to those who are eagerly waiting for him for salvation.
e 10 One sacrifice for sins The law had a shadow of the good [things] to come but not the very image of their reality; for this reason, it can never make perfect those who draw near with the same repetitive annual sacrifices.
 2Or else, would they not have ceased to be offered, because the ones who offer divine service,f having been cleansed, would no longer have felt guilty for their past sins? a Exodus 24:8 The plural “sacrifices” has puzzled many commentators.
 It may be superlative plural or an indication that the one sacrifice of Christ has a manifold manifestation on ‘our side of the veil’ (Malachi 1:11).
 c Greek “he” d Isaias (Isaiah) 53:13 e Or “deliverance” f Greek latreu,ontaj b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 482 3But in those sacrifices there is a yearly reminder of sins.
 4The reason is that it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins.
 5Therefore, when he comes into the world, he says: Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but you have prepared a body for me; 6 You had no pleasure in whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin.
 Then I said, ‘Behold, I have come (in the scroll of the book it is written of me) to do your will, O God.
’a 8First he said, “Sacrifices, offerings, whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin you did not desire, neither had pleasure in them” (those which are offered according to the law), 9and then he said, “Behold, I have come to do your will.
” He takes away the first so that he may establish the second [testament], 10and by this will, we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all! 11Every priest indeed stands serving daily, often offering the same sacrifices which can never take away sins.
 12But Christ,b after he had offered one sacrifice for sins forever, sat down at the right hand of God, 13waiting until his enemies are made the footstool of his feet.
 14By one offering, he has perfected forever those who are being sanctified.
 15The Holy Spirit also testifies to us, for after saying: This is the covenant that I will make with them: ‘After those days,’ says the Lord, ‘I will put my laws on their heart, I will also write them on their mind;’c He then says: I will remember their sins and iniquities no more.
d 18Now, where there is remission of these sins, there is no more offering for sin.
 Boldness in Christ 19Brethren, we have boldness to enter into the holy place by the blood of Jesus, 20by the way which he opened for us (a new and living way, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh).
 21Yes, since we have a great priest over the house of God, 22let us draw near with a true heart full of faith.
 Since our hearts have been sprinkled from an evil conscience and our body washed a Psalm 40:6-8 / 39 LXX (this quote agrees with LXX against the Masoretic text) Greek “he” c Jeremiah 31:33 d Jeremiah 31:34 b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ with pure water, 23let us hang on to the confession of our hope without wavering because the one who made the promise is faithful.
 24Let us consider how to stimulate each other to love and good works.
 25Let us not abandon our own gatherings, which is the habit of some.
 Instead, exhort one another, and even more as you see the Day approaching.
 26But if we sin willfully after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there is no more sacrifice for sins.
 27All that remains is a fearful expectation of judgment and a fury of fire which will devour the adversaries.
 28One who disregards Moses’ law dies without compassion on the word of two or three witnesses.
 29How much worse a punishment, do you think, will one receive who has trampled the Son of God and profaned the blood of the covenant with which he was sanctified, and offended the Spirit of grace? 30For we know him who said, “Vengeance is mine, says the Lord,” “I will repay.
”a And also, “The Lord will judge his people.
”b 31It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God! 32But remember the early days when you had just been enlightened, how you endured a great struggle with sufferings.
 33Sometimes you were exposed to insults and oppressions; and at other times you stood with those who were treated in such a way.
 34Indeed, you had compassion for me in my chains and joyfully accepted the seizure of your property, knowing that you have a better and enduring property in the heavens.
 35Therefore, do not throw away your confidence which has a great reward.
 36Indeed, you need endurance in order to receive the promise after having done the will of God: In a very little while, he who comes will come and will not wait.
 But the righteous will live by faith.
 If he shrinks back, my soul has no pleasure in him.
c 39But we are not of those who shrink back to destruction, but of those who believe and so are saved.
 11 By faith Now, faith is the personal foundationd of things hoped for, certainty about things that cannot be seen.
 2By this, people of old obtained approval.
 3By faith, we understand that the universe was formed by the word of God, so that what is visible was made from what is invisible.
 a Deuteronomy 32:35 Deuteronomy 32:36; Psalm 135:14 / 134 LXX c Habakkuk 2:3-4 d Greek u`po,stasij (person / substance / foundation / assurance; literally: what upholds the stability) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 484 4By faith, Abel offered to God a sacrifice more excellent than Cain’s, and through this a testimony was given to him that he was righteous.
 God testified about his gifts, and although Abel is now dead, he still speaks.
 5By faith, Enoch was taken away in order not to see death: he was not found because God had translated him.
 He too had received a testimony that before his translation, he had been well-pleasing to God.
 6Without faith it is impossible to please God, for whoever comes to God must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him.
 7By faith, Noah, being warned about things not yet seen, was moved with godly fear.
 He prepared a ship to save his household and by this means he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith.
 8By faith, Abraham, when he was called, obeyed and left the place which he was supposed to receive as his inheritance.
 He left, not knowing where he was going.
 9By faith, he lived as an alien in the land of the promise, as in a land that was not his own, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob who were heirs with him of the same promise.
 10Indeed, Abraham looked for the city which has foundations and whose architect and builder is God.
 11By faith, even Sarah received power to conceive and she bore a child when she was past the age because she considered that the one who had promised was faithful.
 12Therefore, one man became the father to people as many as the stars of the sky and as innumerable as the sand on the sea shore, even though he was as good as dead.
 13These people all died in faith, [yet] not having received the promises.
 aThey had seen and embraced them from afar, and they confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims upon the earth.
 14Certainly, people who say such things make it clear that they are seeking a country of their own.
 15If they had been thinking of the country they had originally left, they would have had enough time to return.
 16But in fact, they desire a better country, a heavenly one.
 Therefore, God is not ashamed of them, or ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.
 17By faith, Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac [in sacrifice].
 Yes, he who had joyfully received the promises was now offering up his uniquely lovedb son, 18the very one of whom it was said, “In Isaac will your seed be called.
”c 19Abraham concluded that God was even able to raise up the dead and figuratively speaking, he did receive Isaac back from the dead.
 20By faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, even regarding future events.
 21By faith, Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each one of Joseph’s sons and bowed down,d leaning on the top of his staff.
 22By faith, Joseph, when his a TR adds “being convinced” Greek monogenh/ c Genesis 21:12 d Greek proseku,nhsen (or “worshiped”) b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ end was near, made mention of the exodus of the children of Israel and gave instructions concerning his bones.
 23By faith, Moses, when he was born, was hidden for three months by his parents because they saw that he was a beautiful child and they were not afraid of the king’s commandment.
 24By faith, Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter, 25choosing to share ill-treatment with God’s people rather than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time.
 26He considered the disgrace of the Anointeda greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt because he had his eyes fixed on the reward.
 27By faith, he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king, but he persevered as if he was seeing him who is invisible.
 28By faith, Mosesb kept the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that the destroyer of the firstborn should not touch them.
 29By faith, they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land and when the Egyptians tried to do likewise, they were swallowed up.
 30By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down, after the people [of the city]c had been encircled for seven days.
 31By faith, Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those who were disobedient because she had had received the spies in peace.
 32What more shall I say? Time would fail me if I mentioned Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, Samuel, and the prophets.
 33Through faith, they overpowered kingdoms, administered justice, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,d 34quenched the power of fire,e escaped the edge of the sword,f became strong in weakness, grew mighty in war and caused foreign armies to flee.
 35Women received their dead by resurrection.
g Others were tortured, not accepting their deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.
h 36Others were tried by mocking and scourging, yes, by chains and imprisonment.
 37They were stoned,i they were sawn apart,j they were tempted and they were slain with the sword.
k They went around in sheep and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted and ill-treated.
 And yet the world was not worthy of them! 38They wandered in deserts, mountains, caves, and the holes of the earth.
 39All of them received a testimony through their faith but they did not receive the promise 40because God had made provision for us to have something better, and they were not to reach perfection apart from us.
 a Or “Christ” (Cristou/) Greek “he” c Greek “they” d Daniel 6:22-23 e Daniel 3:1-30 f 1 Kings 19:1-3; 2 Kings 6:31-7:20 g 1 Kings 19:1-3; 2 Kings 6:31-7:20; 2 Maccabees 7:29 h 2 Maccabees 7:29; 12:44 i 2 Chronicles 24:20-21 j A reference to Isaias’ (Isaiah’s) martyrdom k Jeremiah 26:20-23; 1 Kings 19:10 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 486 12 God as our Father And so, seeing that we are surrounded by such a great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the sin which so easily entangles us.
 Let us run with endurance the race that is set before us, 2fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith.
 For the joy that was set before him, he endured the cross, despising its shame, and he has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
 3Consider him who has endured such opposition from sinners, and you will not grow weary or faint in your souls.
 4In your own battle against sin, you have not yet struggled to the point of shedding blood.
 5Have you forgotten the exhortation which reasons with you as with children: My child, do not take lightly the chastening of the Lord, do not faint when you are reproved by him; for whom the Lord loves, he also chastens, and he disciplines every son whom he receives.
a 7Endure hardship as discipline; God is treating you as his children, for what son is there whom his father does not discipline? 8But if you are not getting this discipline, (as you are), this makes you illegitimate, not children! 9Moreover, we had biological fathers to chasten us, and we respected them.
 Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of {our} spirits, and live? 10Our fathers punished us for a few days as seemed good to them; but God does so for our benefit, so that we may be partakers of his holiness.
b 11For the present moment, all discipline seems to be painful rather than joyful, but afterwards, it produces the peaceful fruit of righteousness for those who have been trained by it.
 12Therefore, lift up your drooping hands and your feeble knees.
c 13Make straight paths for your feet,d so what is lame may not be dislocated but rather healed.
 Call to be careful, having approached the awesome God 14Pursue peace with everyone, and also sanctificatione without which no one will see the Lord.
 15Be careful, for fear that any of you might fall short of the grace of God or that any root of bitterness should trouble you; many are poisoned by this.
 16Be careful that there is no sexually immoral or profane person [among you], like Esau who sold his birthright for a meal.
 17As you know, even when he later on desired to inherit the blessing, he a Proverbs 3:11-12 Compare 2 Peter 1:4 c Isaias (Isaiah) 35:3 d Proverbs 4:26 e Or “holiness,” but also “consecration / dedication” b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ was rejected and although he pleaded with tears, he found no way of reversing the decision.
 18As it is, you have not come to a mountain that can be touched; not one that burned with fire, gloom, darkness, storm, 19the sound of a trumpet and the voice of words which made those who heard it beg that not one more word should be spoken to them! 20Indeed, they could not endure what was commanded, “If even an animal touches the mountain, it shall be stoned.
”ab 21So fearful was the appearance that Moses said, “I am terrified and trembling.
”c 22Instead, you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable hosts of angels, 23to the assemblyd of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of the righteous made perfect, 24to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant,e and to the blood of sprinkling which pleads better than Abel’s [blood].
 Worshiping with reverence and awe 25See that you do not refuse to listen to the one who speaks! For if they did not escape when they rejected the one who warned on the Earth, we will certainly not escape if we turn away from the one who warns from heaven! 26Then, his voice shook the earth, but now, he has promised with these words, “Yet again, I will shake not only the earth, but also the heavens.
”f 27The words “yet once more” indicates the removal of the things that are shaken since they are created things.
 But those things which are not shaken remain.
 28Therefore, since we are receiving a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be grateful and so offer divine serviceg to God acceptably, with reverence and awe,h 29for our God is a consuming fire.
i 13 Final exhortations Keep on loving each other as brethren.
 2Do not forget to be hospitable to strangers, for in doing so, some have welcomed angels without knowing it!j a TR adds “or shot with an arrow” [see Exodus 19:12-13] Exodus 19:12-13 c Deuteronomy 9:19 d Or “Church / congregation” e Jeremiah 31:31 f Haggai 2:6 g Greek latreu,wmen h Or “fear” i Deuteronomy 4:24 j KJV has the famous expression “entertained angels unawares” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 488 3Remember those who are in chains, as chained with them, and also those who are ill-treated, as if you too were suffering in the body.
 4Marriage must be held in honor among all and the [marriage] bed [kept] undefiled:a but God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterers.
 5Be free from the love of money and be satisfied with what you have.
 As God has said: I will in no way leave you, neither will I in any way forsake you.
b 6And so, we say with good courage: The Lord is my helper, I will not fear.
 What can man do to me?c 7Remember your leaders, those men who proclaimed the word of God to you.
 Considering the results of their conduct, imitate their faith.
 8Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever.
 9Do not be carried away by all sorts of strange teachings.
 It is good that the inner persond should be strengthened by grace, not by food which is of no profit to those who are so preoccupied by it! 10We have an altar from which those who offer divine servicee [in] the holy tabernacle have no right to eat.
 11For the bodies of those animals (whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high priest as an offering for sin,) are burned outside of the camp.
f 12This is why Jesus suffered outside of the gate, so that he might sanctify the people through his own blood.
 13Let us therefore go out [of the city] to him who is outside of the camp and let us bear his disgrace.
 14For we do not have here [below] an enduring city, but we seek the one that is to come.
 15Through him, [Jesus], let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God,g the fruit of our lips which confessed his Name.
 16But do not forget to do what is good and to share because God is well pleased with such sacrifices.
 17Obey your leaders and submit to them as they watch over your souls as people who will give an account.
 This way, they will be able to do this with joy and not with grief because that would not be profitable for you.
 18Pray for us: we are persuaded that we have a good conscience, desiring to live honorably in all things.
 19I strongly urge you to pray for this: that I may be restored to you sooner.
 a The same Greek word is used in 8:26 Deuteronomy 31:6 c Psalm 118:6-7 / 117 LXX d Greek “heart” e Greek latreu,ontej f Leviticus 16:27 g Psalm 50:23 / 49 LXX b TO THE HEBREWS - ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ 20Now, may the God of peace, who with the blood of an eternal covenant brought back from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus, 21make you complete in every good work so that you may do his will.
 May Goda work in you what is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory unto ages of ages.
 Amen.
 22But I exhort you, brethren: take this word of exhortation attentively since I have written to you briefly.
 23Know that our brother Timothy has been released.
 If he arrives soon, I will see you with him.
 24Greet all your leaders and all the saints.
 Those from Italy greet you.
 25Grace be with you all! Amen.
 a Greek “he” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 490 INTRODUCTION TO THE OTHER EPISTLES THE EPISTLE OF JAMES Authorship / Date There is no reason to question the traditional view that James, the first bishop of Jerusalem and ‘brothera of the Lord’ was the author of this inspiring and practical epistle.
 The Jewish-Christian element is very strong, and the epistle is a refutation of extreme interpretations of St.
 Paul’s antithesis between faith and “the works of the Law.
” St.
 James the Just was martyred in 62 or 68 AD, which means that his epistle can be dated between 48 (date for Romans, which may be alluded to in James) and 68 AD.
 Themes James can be seen as a form of Christian wisdom literature (1:5; 3:13-15).
 The author applies this theme to a large array of practical subjects, including:  Authentic Christian living (endurance, temptations, speech, hospitality)  Relations in the Christian assembly (partiality, mutual support, quarrels)  Prayer and illness.
 THE EPISTLES OF JOHN Authorship / Dates On the basis of common themes, expressions and ancient tradition, all three epistles can safely be ascribed to the same John who wrote the fourth gospel.
 They can be dated to the very end of the apostle’s life, circa 96-98 AD.
 Themes Like James, John stresses the difference between a mere claim to know God and a true and tested faith.
 Important themes include: a See Appendix E INTRODUCTION TO THE OTHER (GENERAL) EPISTLES  The centrality of Christ as word and revelation of God the Father  The centrality of love as a practical demonstration of one’s faith  The importance of true doctrine, and the contrast between genuine Christians and antichrists, or light and darkness, truth and deceit.
 The apostle also issues a stern warning on having any association with rebellious heretics (2 John 1:10).
 THE PETRINE EPISTLES, THE EPISTLE OF JUDE Authorship / Dates 1 Peter has always been recognized as an authentic letter of the great apostle, probably written in Rome or Jerusalem (5:13) with Sylvanus (5:12) as secretary.
 It may have been written between 50 and 67 AD.
 Conversely, 2 Peter had a long and controversial reception in the canon of the New Testament.
 Writing in the mid to late second century, Origen noted: And Peter, on whom the Church of Christ is built, against which the gates of Hades shall not prevail, has left one acknowledged epistle, and, it may be, a second also, for it is doubted.
 As late as the mid-third century, Eusebius classified 2 Peter among the ‘disputed books’ (antilegomena) and seemed to have rejected its canonicity: Of the disputed books which are nevertheless known to most are the letter called James, that of Jude, the second letter of Peter, and the so-called second and third letters of John.
 But the so-called second letter [of Peter] we have not received as canonical, but nevertheless it has appeared useful to many, and has been studied with other scriptures.
 (Ecclesiastical History, 3.
25.
3; 3.
3.
1-4) Eusebius’ doubts regarding 2 Peter stemmed from the fact that unlike 1 Peter, it was not quoted by the early writers.
 Modern scholarship is even more negative on the possibility of ascribing 2 Peter to the second half of the first century and therefore to the chief apostle.
 However, the consensus of the Churches crystallized during the mid-300s and the epistle was accepted as genuinely Petrine.
 This discernment took into account the fact that two secretaries or ‘interpreters’ could very well explain the major differences in styles and vocabularies.
 Indeed, the Greek-speaking bishops would have also noticed significant indications that both epistles had a common mind behind them: There are several words and phrases in 1 & 2 Peter that either occur only in these two letters or are relatively rare elsewhere in the New Testament: "virtue" (aretê) (2 Pet 1:3, 5; 1 Pet 2:9); "manner of life" (anastrophê) (2 Pet THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 492 2:7; 3:11; 1 Pet 1:15, 18; 2:12; 3:1, 2, 16); "to live in a certain manner" (anastrephomai) (2 Pet 2:18; 1 Pet 1:17); "without blemish or defect" (aspilos kai amômos [or amômêtos]) (2 Pet 3:14; 1 Pet 1:19 [in reverse order]); "putting off" (apothesis) (2 Pet 1:14; 1 Pet 3:21); "eyewitness" or "to be an eyewitness" (epoptês or epopteuô) (2 Pet 1:16; 1 Pet 2:12; 3:2); "support" (stêrigmos) (2 Pet 3:17) and "unstable" (astêriktos) (1 Pet 2:14; 3:16); "never ceasing from sin" (akatapaustos hamartias) (2 Pet 2:14) and "He has ceased from sin" (pepautai hamartias) (1 Pet 4:1); "indecency" (aselgeia) (2 Pet 2:2, 7, 18; 1 Pet 4:3); "soul" (to designate persons) (psuchê) (2 Pet 2:8, 14; 1 Pet 1:9, 22; 2:11, 25; 3:20; 4:19); use of the metaphor "growth" to describe spiritual progress (auxanein) (1 Pet 2:2; 2 Pet 3:18).
 (Source: course syllabus for New Testament Introduction, Atlantic Baptism Seminary) Moreover, the close relationship between 2 Peter and Jude actually reinforced the reception of both epistles as genuinely apostolic.
 The JudeoChristian mindset of 2 Peter and Jude is consistent with Peter’s ministry and with the specific needs of this community; hence, Peter is called “Simeon,” not Simon Peter or Kephas.
 It seems that Jude, a brothera of James of Jerusalem (1:1) (and therefore a relative of the Lord) may have adapted Peter’s second epistle.
 However, other scholars favor the view that 2 Peter used Jude as a source since the Petrine epistle is actually longer and that Peter’s edition deliberately omitted specifically Jewish-Christians elements such as the references to 1 Enoch and the Assumption of Moses.
 Both 2 Peter and Jude are difficult to date and may be placed between 60 and 110.
 This later date is suggested by those who consider 2 Peter and possibly Jude as ‘pseudepigrapha,’ i.
e.
 writings placed under the mantle of a departed prophet or master by their disciples in order to perpetuate and actualize their teaching and ministry.
 Themes 1 Peter deals with the practical aspects of Christian living and the call to personal holiness of those who have been “begotten again through to living hope.
” 2 Peter is a final admonition on the danger of false teachers and the tragic consequences of embracing false doctrine or falling into apostasy.
 Jude explores the same themes as 2 Peter and presents apostasy as a rebellion against divinely established order.
 a There is also a reference to Jude as “of James” (‘brother of’ or ‘son of’) in Acts 1:13 EPISTLE OF JAMES - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΑΚΩΒΟΥ JAMES (ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΑΚΩΒΟΥ) 1 James, a servanta of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the Twelve tribes which are in the Dispersion: Greetings! Enduring trials and temptations 2Consider it as all joy, my brethren, when you fall into various trials, that the testing of your faith produces endurance.
 4Let endurance have its full effect, so that you may be perfect and whole, lacking in nothing.
 5Yet, if any of you lacks wisdom, let such one ask of God who gives to all abundantly and without finding fault; and it will be given to him.
 6But ask in faith, without any doubting, for whoever doubts is like a wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed.
 7Such a person should not think that anything will be received from the Lord.
 8This is being doubleminded, unstable in every way.
 3knowing 9Let the brethren of humble circumstances glory in their high position.
 the rich should rejoice in being made humble, because like the flower in the grass, they will pass away.
 11Indeed, the sun arises with the scorching wind and withers the grass, its flower falls and the beauty of its appearance perishes.
 Likewise, the rich shall fade away in their pursuits.
 10But 12Blessed is the one who endures temptation because after being approved, he will receive the crown of life which the Lord promised to those who love him.
 13When temptations come, let no one say, “I am tempted by God,” because God cannot be tempted by evil and he himself tempts no one.
 14But a person is tempted when drawn away and enticed by his own lust.
 15Then the lust, when it has conceived, gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is full grown, results in death.
 16Do not be deceived, my beloved brethren! 17Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights with whom there can be no variation or shifting shadow.
 18He brought us forth of his own will by the word of truth, so that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.
 a Or “slave” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 494 Doers of the word 19Know this, my beloved brethren: be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to anger!a 20Anger does not produce the righteousness of God.
 21Therefore, putting away all [moral] impurity and remains of wickedness, receive with humility the implanted word which is able to save your souls.
b 22Be ‘doers of the word;’ not only hearers who delude themselves! 23Certainly, if anyone is a ‘hearer of the word’ and not a doer, such a person is like someone looking at his natural face in a mirror.
 24Seeing himself and going away, he immediately forgets what kind of person he was.
 25But whoever looks into the perfect law of freedom and perseveres [in it], not being a hearer who forgets but a doer of the work, will be blessed in doing so.
 26If anyone among you considers himself to be religiousc but does not bridle his tongue, such a one deceives his heart and his religion is worthless.
 27Religion that is pure and undefiled in the sight of our God and Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their afflictions and to keep oneself unstained by the world.
 2 Partiality and judgment My brethren, do not hold the faith of our Lord of glory Jesus Christ with partiality.
d 2Yet, if someone with a gold ring and fine clothing comes into your synagogue,e and a poor man in filthy clothing also comes in, 3you pay special attention to the one who wears the fine clothing! To the rich you say, “Sit here in a good place,” but you tell the poor man, “Stand over there,” or “Sit by my footstool!” 4Have you not shown partiality among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? 5Listen, my beloved brethren: did not God choose those who are poor in this world to be rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom which he promised to those who love him? 6Yet, you have dishonored the poor! Is it not the rich who oppress you and personally drag you before the courts? 7Do they not blaspheme the honorable Namef by which you are called? 8However, if you fulfill the royal law found in the Scripture, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself,”g you do well.
 9But if you discriminate, you commit sin and you are convicted by the law as transgressors.
 10Truly, whoever keeps the whole law and yet a The 1611 Authorized Version associates Sirach 5:11 with James 1:19 in a marginal note.
 Or “preserve your life” c Or “devout / pious” d Or “discrimination / favoritism” e Or “meeting” f That is the Name of Jesus Christ g Leviticus 19:18 b EPISTLE OF JAMES - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΑΚΩΒΟΥ stumbles in one point has become guilty of everything.
 11For he who said, “Do not commit adultery”a also said “Do not commit murder.
”b Now, if you do not commit adultery but murder, you have become a transgressor of the law.
 12And so, speak and act as people who are going to be judged by a law of freedom.
 13Indeed, judgment is without mercy to those who have shown no mercy, but mercy triumphs over judgment.
 Faith and works 14What good is it, my brethren, if someone claims to have faith but has no works? Can faith save such a person?c 15If a brother or sister is in rags and lacking daily food, 16and one of you tells them, “Go in peace, be warmed and filled” and does not give them what the body needs, what good is that? 17Likewise faith, if it has no works, is dead in itself.
 18Yes, someone will say, “You have faith, and I have works!” Show me your faith without works, and by my works, I will show you my faith.
 19You believe that God is one!d You do well! The demons also believe, and they shudder.
 20Fool! Will you not recognize that apart from works, faith is dead? 21Was not our father Abraham justified by works, by offering up his son Isaac on the altar? 22You can see that [his] faith was working with his actions,e and that by works, faith was perfected.
 23Thus, the Scripture which says, “Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him as righteousness”f was fulfilled, and he was called the friend of God.
 24You see, then, that one is justifiedg by works, and not only by faith.
h 25In the same way, was not Rahab the prostitute also justified by works, by receiving the messengers and sending them out another way? 26For just as the body is dead apart from the spirit,i so is faith dead apart from works.
 3 The tongue as fire Not many of you should be teachers, my brothers, knowing that we shall receive a stricter judgment.
 2In many things, we all stumble.
 Anyone who does not stumble in word is perfect, even able to bridle the whole body! a Exodus 20:14; Deuteronomy 5:18 Exodus 10:13; Deuteronomy 5:17 c This verse is also translated “Can such faith save him? (NIV) / Can his faith save him? (RSV) / Can faith save him? (NKJ) / Will that faith bring salvation? (NJB)” d Or “that there is one God” e Or “works / deeds” f Genesis 15:6 g Greek dikaiou/tai h Or “not by faith alone” i Or perhaps “breath” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 496 3Indeed, we put bits into the horses’ mouths so that they may obey us, and this way, we guide their whole body.
 4Or considerer the ships: although they are very large and driven by fierce winds, they are guided by a very small rudder as the pilot desires.
 5Likewise, the tongue is a little member but it boasts great things! See how a small fire can spread to a large forest! 6The tongue is also a fire!a Among all our members, the tongue is a world of wrongdoing which defiles the whole body.
 It sets on fire the course of nature and it is set on fire by the fires of hell.
b 7Every kind of animal, bird, reptile and sea creature is tamed and has been tamed by mankind.
 8But nobody can tame the tongue! It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
 9With it we bless our God and Father, and with it we curse those who are made in the image of God.
 10From the same mouth comes forth blessing and cursing.
 My brethren, this should not be! 11Does a spring pour forth fresh and salty water from the same opening? 12My brethren, can a fig tree produce olives, or [can] a vine [produce] figs? Likewise, salt water cannot produce fresh water.
 Heavenly vs.
 demonic wisdom 13Who is wise and understanding among you? Let such a person show by a good conduct that his deeds are done in the gentleness of wisdom.
 14But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your heart, do not boast and do not lie against the truth.
 15This ‘wisdom’ is not the one that comes down from above! It is earthly, sensual, and demonic.
 16Where there is jealousy and selfish ambition, there is confusion and every evil deed.
 17But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceful, gentle, reasonable, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and hypocrisy.
 18Now, the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace.
c 4 Cause of conflicts These wars and conflicts among you, where do they come from? Is it not from your desires that wage war in your members? 2You lust, and do not have! You kill, covet, and [still] cannot obtain! You fight and make war.
 You do not have because you do not ask! 3You ask and do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, in order to spend it for your pleasures.
 4Adulterers and adulteresses!d Do you not know that friendship a Compare Wisdom of Sirach 5:13;28:12 Literally “Gehenna” c Compare Matthew 5:9 d Or “You unfaithful people!” CT reads “Adulteresses!” b EPISTLE OF JAMES - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΑΚΩΒΟΥ with the world is hostilitya with God? Whoever wants to be a friend of the world becomes an enemy of God! 5Or do you think that the Scriptureb says in vain, “The spirit which dwellsc in us longs to envy”?d 6But he has given a greater, as the Scripture says: God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.
e 7Therefore, submit yourselves to God, but resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
 8Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you.
 Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you who are double-minded.
 9Lament, mourn, and weep! Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to gloom.
f 10Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he will exalt you.
 11Do not speak against one another, brethren.
 Whoever speaks against one of the brethren and judges speaks against the law and judges the law.
 But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law, but a judge! 12Only one is the lawgiver, he who is able to save and to destroy.
 But who are you to judge another? Warning against presumption 13Now listen, you who say, “Today or tomorrow, we will go into this city, spend a year there, do business and make a profit.
” 14Yet, you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow! Truly, what is your life? You are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes away.
 15Instead, you should say, “If the Lord wills, we will live and also do this or that.
” 16Nevertheless, you boast and brag! All such boasting is evil.
 17If someone knows how to do what is good and yet does not do it, it is a sin.
 5 Warning to the wealthy Listen, you who are rich: weep and howl for the miseries that are coming on you.
 2Your riches are corrupted and your garments are eaten by moths.
g 3Your gold and silver are rusted; their rust will be a testimony against you and it will eat your flesh like fire.
 You have laid up your treasure in the last a Or “enmity” This quote cannot be found in any Old Testament book.
 It may simply be reference to ideas and concepts found in the Old Testament scriptures c MT/ TR read “dwelt” whereas CT has “he [has] caused to dwell” d This is a difficult verse which can also be translated: “He yearns with jealousy for the Spirit he has caused to dwell in us” (see previous note for textual variant).
 e Proverbs 3:34.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT f Compare Matthew 5:4 g Compare Matthew 6:19-20 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 498 days.
 4Behold, the wages of the laborers who worked in your fields and which you have kept back by fraud cry out! The cries of those who reaped [for you] have reached the ears of the Lord Sabbaoth.
a 5On earth, you have lived in luxury and taken your pleasure.
 You have eaten your hearts’ content as in a day of slaughter.
 6You have condemned, you have murdered the righteous one who does not resist you.
 Exhortation to patience – Anointing with oil 7Therefore, be patient, brethren, until the coming of the Lord.
 Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient over it, until it receives the early and late rain.
 8You also should be patient.
 Strengthen your hearts, for the coming of the Lord is at hand.
 9Brethren, do not grumble against one another, so that you will not be judged.
 Behold, the judge stands at the door! 10Brethren, consider as an example of suffering and patience the prophets who spoke in the Name of the Lord.
 11Behold, we call those who endured blessed.
 You have heard of the patience of Job and you have seen the Lord in the outcome, how the Lord is full of compassion and mercy.
 12But above all things, my brethren, do not swear, neither by heaven or earth, nor by any other oath.
 Instead, let your “yes” be “yes,” and your “no,” “no;” so that you may not fall into hypocrisy.
b 13Are any among you suffering? Let themc pray.
 Are any cheerful? Let them sing praises! 14Are any among you sick? Let them call for the presbyters of the Church: they should pray over them and anoint them with oil in the Name of the Lord.
d 15The prayer of faith will heal those who are sick and the Lord will raise them up.
 If they have committed sins, they will be forgiven.
 16Confess your offenses to one another and pray for one another in order to be healed.
 The insistent prayer of a righteous person is powerfully effective! 17Elias (Elijah) was a man in every way like us, and when he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, it did not rain on the earth for three years and six months! 18When he prayed later on, the sky gave rain and the earth brought forth its fruit.
 19Brethren, if someone among you wanders from the truth and is brought back by another, 20know that whoever brings back a sinner from wandering will save a soul from death and will cover a multitude of sins.
e a Or “of hosts” - Hebrew: Tze’va’ot (“of armies / of angelic hosts”) TR/CT reads “fall under condemnation” c Verse 13-20: the Greek masc.
 sing.
 is translated as plural.
 d Compare Mark 6:13 e Compare 1 Peter 4:8 b EPISTLE OF PETER 1 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ Α 1 PETER (ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ Α) 1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the electa who are living as exiles, scatteredb in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.
 2This is according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in the sanctification of the Spirit, so that you may obey Jesus Christ and be sprinkled with his blood.
 Grace be to you and may peace be multiplied! Demonstration of faith – Called to holiness 3Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy, became our father again.
 This is to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 4to an incorruptible and undefiled inheritance that does not fade away.
 It is reserved in heaven for you 5who by the power of God are protected through faith for a salvation which is ready to be revealed in the last time.
 6In this, you greatly rejoice, although for a little while, if need be, you have been grieved by various trials.
 7This way, may the demonstration of your faith (which is more precious than gold that perishes even though it is tested by fire), be found to result in praise, glory, and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ! 8Even though you have not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with unspeakable joy and glory.
 9And so you are receiving the result of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
 10About this salvation, the prophets (who prophesied of the grace that would come to you) did much research and investigation.
 11They were investigating the time and circumstances that the Spirit of Christc (which was in them) pointed to by predicting the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow them.
d 12They received revelation that they were servants of these things not for themselves but for you.
 These [things] have now been announced to you by those who preached the Good News by the Holy Spirit sent out from heaven, and [even the] angelse desire to gaze upon these things.
 a Or “chosen ones” Greek diaspora/j (diaspora) c Or possibly, “spirit of the Anointed One” d Compare Isaias (Isaiah) 53 e The Greek a;ggeloi could also mean “messengers” in reference to the prophets of old b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 500 13Therefore, prepare your minds for action,a be soberb and set your hope fully on the grace that is brought to you by the revelation of Jesus Christ.
 14Be children of obedience and do not conform yourselves to your former lusts as in [the days of] your ignorance.
 15But just as he who called you is holy, you yourselves should also be holy in every aspect of your life, 16because it is written, “You shall be holy, for I am holy.
”c 17If you call on him who judges without discrimination according to everyone’s work as Father, spend your lives as exiles here {on earth}, in reverent fear.
 18Knowd that it was not with corruptible things (such as silver or gold) that you were redeemed from the useless way of life handed down to you by your forefathers.
 19Instead, it was with precious blood of a blameless and pure lamb, the blood of Christ! 20He was foreknown even before the foundation of the world but he was revealed at the end of times for your sake.
 21Through him, you believe in God who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope might be in God.
 Call to brotherly affection 22Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth through the Spirit,e love one another from the heart, in sincere brotherly affection and fervently! 23You have been born again, not of corruptible but of incorruptible seed, through the word of God which lives and remains forever.
f 24Truly: All flesh is like grass,g and all of man’s glory like the flower in the grass.
 The grass withers, and its flower falls; but the word of the Lord endures forever.
h This is the word of Good News which was preached to you.
 2 A spiritual house, a holy priesthood Therefore, putting away all wickedness, deceit, hypocrisy, envies, and all evil speaking, 2as newborn babies, long for the pure milk of the Word, so that you may grow from it.
 3If indeed you have tasted that the Lord is a Literally, “gird up the waist of your mind” or “put on the belt of the waist of your mind” Greek “clear-minded” c Leviticus 11:44-45 d Or “recognize / perceive / acknowledge” e CT omits “through the Spirit” f CT reads “living and abiding Word of God” instead of “the word of God which lives and remains forever” g NT agrees with LXX against MT h Isaias (Isaiah) 40:6-8 b EPISTLE OF PETER 1 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ Α gracious, 4come to him who is a living stone, rejected by men but chosen by God and precious.
 5You also, as living stones, are being built up as a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, in order to offer up spiritual sacrifices that are acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
 6As the Scripture has it: Behold, I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone, chosen, and precious: Whoever believes in him will not be disappointed.
a 7For you who believe, this brings honor, but for those who are disobedient: The stone which the builders rejected, has become the chief cornerstone,b 8and: a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense.
c Indeed, they stumble at the word and are disobedient, which is what they were laid asided for.
 9But you are a chosene race, a royal priesthood,f a holy nation, a people for God’s own possession,g so that you may proclaim the wonderful deeds of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
 10In the past, you were not a people, but now, you are God’s people.
 In the past, you had not obtained mercy, but now, you have obtained mercy.
 11Beloved, I beg you as exiles and pilgrims {in this world} to abstain from carnal lusts which [are at] war against the soul.
 12Live righteous lives among the nations so that if people accuse you of being evildoers, they may, by your good works which they see, glorify God in the day of visitation.
 13Therefore, for the Lord’s sake, submit yourselves to every human institution: to the emperor as supreme [law-giver], 14or to governors as commissioned by himh to punish those who do evil and to praise to those who do good.
i 15For this is the will of God: that by going good you should silence the ignorance of those who are foolish.
 16Be free, but do not use your freedom as a cloak of wickedness; but as slaves of God.
 a Or “put to shame.
” See Isaias (Isaiah) 28:16.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT Psalms 118:22 / 117 LXX c Isaias (Isaiah) 8:14.
 NT agrees with MT against LXX d Or “appointed to / destined to do” e Always synonymous with “elect;” Greek evklekto,n f Compare Exodus 19:6.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT g NT agrees with LXX against MT h Probably a reference to the emperor or perhaps to God i Compare Romans 13:1-5 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 502 Call to reverence and endurance 17Honor everyone.
 Love the [family of] brethren.
 Fear God.
 Honor the king.
 18Servants,a be in subjection to your masters with full reverence, not only to the good and kind but also to the wicked.
 19Truly, it is worthy of praise if someone endures pain and suffers unjustly because of conscience toward God.
 20But what glory is there if when you sin, you patiently endure a beating? However, if you patiently endure suffering when you do good, this is worthy of praise with God.
 21You were called to this, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving usb an example so that you should follow in his steps.
 22Yet, he did not sin, “neither was deceit found in his mouth”c 23and when he was cursed, he did not curse back.
 When he suffered, he did not threaten but committed himself to the one who judges righteously.
 24In his body, he bore in himself our sins on the tree, so that having died to sins, we might live to righteousness; and ‘by his stripes you were healed’.
d 25Indeed, you were going astray like sheep, but now, you have returned to the shepherd and overseere of your souls.
 3 Instructions for wives and husbands In the same way, wives, be in subjection to your own husbands.
 This way, even if they do not obey the word, they might be won by the behavior of their wives without a word, 2seeing your pure and reverent attitude.
 3Your beauty should not only consist in external ornaments and hairstyles, golden jewelry or fine clothing.
 4Instead, let it be in the hidden person of the heart, in the incorruptible adornment of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is very precious in the sight of God.
 5This is how the holy women of the past hoped in God and also adorned themselves.
 They were submissive to their own husbands, 6as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him “lord.
” You are now her children if you do what is good and do not give in to fear.
 7In the same way, you husbands should live with your wives according to knowledge, giving them honor as to the weaker vessel and also as jointheirs of the grace of life.
 This way, your prayers will not be hindered.
 Imitators of what is good – Do not fear 8Finally, be all like-minded, compassionate, loving as brethren, tenderhearted, polite, 9not giving back evil for evil or insult for insult.
 a Or “slaves” Other manuscripts read “you” instead of “us” c Isaias (Isaiah) 53:9.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT d Isaias (Isaiah) 53:5 e Greek evpi,skopon b EPISTLE OF PETER 1 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ Α Instead, give back blessing, knowing that you are called to do this, so that you [yourselves] may inherit a blessing.
 10For: Whoever would love life, and see good days, should keep his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking deceit.
 Let him turn away from evil, and do good.
 Let him seek peace, and pursue it.
 For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and his ears open to their prayer; but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.
a 13Now, who will harm you, if you become imitators ofb what is good? 14But even if you should suffer for righteousness’ sake, you are blessed.
 “Do not fear what they fear, and do not be troubled.
”c 15Sanctify the Lord Godd in your hearts and always be ready to give a verbal defensee to everyone who asks you an explanation for the hope that is in you; [and do so] with humility and fear.
 16Have a good conscience, so that even while some speak against you as evildoers and curse your good way of life in Christ, they may be put to shame.
f 17It is better, if it is God’s will, that you should suffer for doing what is good rather than for doing what is evil.
 Christ’s work of salvation - Baptism 18Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous, so that he might bring you to God.
 He was put to death in the flesh but [made] alive in [the] spirit.
g 19Thus, he also descendedh and preached to the spirits in prison.
 20In the past, those had been disobedient, when God waited patiently in the days of Noah, while the ark was being built.
 In this ark, a few, (that is eight souls,) were saved through water.
 21This is an antitypei of baptism, which now saves you.
 Baptismj is not the putting away of the impurity of the flesh but the appeal of a good conscience {in your relationship} toward God through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
 22He is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, with angels, authorities and powers being subject to him.
 a Psalms 34:12-16 / 33 LXX CT reads “zealous for” instead of “imitators of” c Isaias (Isaiah) 8:12 d CT reads “Christ [as] Lord” e Greek pro.
j avpologi,an f Or “disappointed” g Or “by the Spirit” h Or “went” i Greek avnti,tupon (the fulfillment of a figure that pointed to a greater reality) j Greek “it” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 504 4 Life in the spirit Therefore, as Christ suffered for us in the flesh, equip yourselves with the same mind; for anyone who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin.
 2Thus you should no longer live the rest of your time in the flesh for human lusts but to do God’s will.
 3Truly, we have spent enough of our past time fulfilling the desires of [non-believing] Gentiles.
a We used to live in indecency, lusts, excess drinking, orgies, riotous behavior and abominable idolatries.
 4They think it is strange that you no longer run with them into the same abusive lifestyle, and they speak evil of you.
 5However, they will give an account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead! 6For this reason, the Good News was preached even to the dead,b so that they might in the flesh undergo the judgment that faces all human beings but [then] live in the spirit as to God.
c 7The end of all things is near! Therefore, be clear-minded, self-controlled and sober in prayer.
 8Above all things, be committed to your mutual love because love covers a multitude of sins.
 9Be hospitable to one another, without grumbling.
 10As each has received a gift, use it to serve each other, as good stewards of the grace of God in its various forms.
 11If anyone speaks, let it be as the very words of God.
 If anyone serves, let it be with the strength that God supplies, so that in all things, God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom belong the glory and the dominion unto ages of ages.
 Amen.
 A fiery trial 12Beloved, do not be astonished at the fiery trial which has come upon you and that is testing you.
 It is not as if something strange was happening to you.
 13But because you are partakers of Christ’s sufferings, rejoice, so that at the revelation of his glory you also may rejoice with exceeding joy.
 14If you are insulted for the Name of Christ, you are blessed because the divine Spirit of glory is resting upon you.
 dOn their part, Christe is blasphemed, but on your part he is glorified.
 15However, let none of you suffer as a murderer, a thief, an evil doer or a meddler in other people’s matters.
 16Still, if one of you suffers for being a Christian, there is no reason to be ashamed but {instead let such a one} glorify God in this matter.
 17For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household of God.
 If it a Or “nations” It is unclear whether these are physically or spiritually dead individuals.
 c Or more literally “live as God does in spirit” where spirit / pnevma seems to be used as a reference to the spiritual realm d CT omits the second part of the verse e Greek “he” b EPISTLE OF PETER 1 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ Α begins first with us, what will happen to those who do not obey the Good News of God? If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will happen to the ungodly and the sinner?a 18 19Therefore, let those who suffer according to the will of God (in doing good) entrust their soulsb to him who is a faithful Creator.
 5 Exhortation to presbyters I exhort the presbyters among you, as the fellow-presbyterc and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and as one who will also share in the glory that is to be revealed: 2Be shepherds to the flock of God which is in your care.
 Do not oversee the flock under compulsion but willingly,d not for dishonest gain but with eagerness.
 3Do not act as lords over those entrusted to you but become examples to the flock.
 4When the chief shepherd is revealed, you will receive the crown of glory that does not fade away.
 Call to humility 5Likewise, you younger ones, be subject to those who are older.
 Yes, all of you should clothe yourselves with humility and subject yourselves to one another, for “God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.
”e 6Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in due time.
 7Cast all your worries on him, because he cares for you.
 8Be sober, self-controlled and watchful.
 Your adversary, the devil, roams around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour.
 9Resist him, steadfast in your faith, knowing that your brethren throughout the world experience the same sufferings.
 10But after you have suffered a little while, may the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect, restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast.
 11To him be the glory and the power unto ages of ages.
 Amen.
 a Proverbs 11:31.
 NT agrees with LXX against MT Or “commit their lives” c Greek o` sumpresbu,teroj d CT adds “according to [the will of] God” e Proverbs 3:34 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 506 12Through Silvanus, our faithful brother as I consider him, I have written to you briefly, exhorting and testifying that this is the true grace of God in which you stand.
 13She who is in Babylon,a chosenb together with you, greets you; and so does Mark, my son.
 14Greet one another with a kiss of love! Peace be to you all who are in Christ Jesus! Amen.
 Saint Peter 6th-century encaustic icon Saint Catherine's Monastery, Mount Sinai a b A code name for Rome or Jerusalem (see Introduction to the Revelation of John) Or “elect” (compare 2 John 1:1) EPISTLE OF PETER 2 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ B 2 PETER (ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ B) 1 Simon Peter, a servanta and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained a precious faith like ours, with us, in the righteousness of our God and Saviorb Jesus Christ: 2May grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.
 Precious and tremendous promises 3His divine power has granted us all that we need to live in godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and virtue.
 4Though these things, he has granted to us his precious and tremendous promises, so that having escaped from the corruption that is in the world by lust, you may become partakers of the divine nature.
 5For this very reason, do your utmost to add to your faith goodness; and to goodness, knowledge.
 6To knowledge, add self-control; and to self-control, perseverance; and to perseverance, godliness; 7and in godliness add brotherly affection; and in brotherly affection, love.
 8Truly, if these things are yours and overflow, they will prevent you from being idle or unfruitful to the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
 9But those who lack these things are blind; they only see what is near and they have forgotten the cleansing from their old sins.
 10Therefore, brethren, do all that you can to make your calling and election assured.
c For if you do these things, you will never stumble.
 11Thus, you will be richly granted the entrance into the eternal Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
 Peter’s reminder 12Therefore, I will not be negligent to remind you of these things although you [already] know them and are established in the truth which you now have.
 13I think it right, as long as I am in this tent,d to stir you up by reminding you [these things].
 14I know that I shall lay aside my tent very a Or “slave” Or “of our God and [of the] Savior Jesus Christ” which agrees with the similar structure of 1:2.
 See also note on Titus 2:13.
 c Greek bebai,an – see Appendix B and Bishop, Eucharist, Church (Zizioulas) for a discussion of how this word is used by St.
 Ignatius of Antioch to point to the ‘valid’ (assured / bebeia) Eucharist as the one celebrated by the bishop or under his authority.
 d That is, the body b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 508 quickly, even as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me.
 15And so, I will make every effort [to ensure] that you will always be able to remember these things, even after my departure.
 16Certainly, we did not depend on cleverly invented fables when we told you about the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; we were eyewitnesses of his majesty! 17For he received from God the Father honor and glory when the voice came to him from the Majestic Glory, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
”a 18We heard this voice come out of heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain.
 19Therefore, we have the word of prophecy made even more certain, and you should pay attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning starb arises in your hearts.
 20Know this first of all, that no interpretationc of Scriptural prophecy happens as something private, 21because no prophecy ever came by human will: holy men of God spoke, being moved by the Holy Spirit.
 2 False teachers - Slaves of corruption However, false prophets also arose among the people, as false teachers will also be among you.
 They will secretly bring in destructive heresies, even denying the Master who bought them, bringing upon themselves swift destruction.
 2Many will follow their immorald ways and as a result, the way of the truth will acquire a bad reputation.
 3They will exploit you greedily with deceptive words.
 Their sentence, pronounced long ago, does not linger, and their destruction does not slumber.
 4For God did not spare angels when they sinned but cast them down to Tartaruse and committed them to pits of darkness to be reserved for judgment.
 5He did not spare the ancient world but preserved Noah (a preacher of righteousness) with seven others when he brought a flood on the world of the ungodly.
 6He also turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemning them to destruction and making them an example to those who would lead ungodly lives.
 7He delivered the righteous Lot who was very distressed by the lustful behaviorf of these wicked people: 8that righteous man was living among them and was tormented every day in his righteous soul when he saw and heard lawless a Matthew 17:5; Mark 9:7; Luke 9:35 Compare Revelation 2:28 c Or “explanation” d TR reads “destructive” e Tartarus is similar to the Abyss.
 It is not identical to hell (Gehenna).
 f Or “conduct, way, life” b EPISTLE OF PETER 2 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ B deeds.
 9The Lord knows how to deliver the godly from temptation and how to hold the wicked for their punishment on the day of judgment, 10especially those follow the desires of their corrupt human nature and have no respect for [angelic] authority.
a Daring and self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of the glorious ones,b 11whereas angels, although greater in might and power, do not bring a slanderous judgment against them before the Lord.
 12But these people act as creatures without reason, as natural animals [that are meant] to be taken and destroyed.
 They speak evil in matters about which they are ignorant and in their attempt to destroy they will surely be destroyed, 13receiving the wages of unrighteousness.
 These are people who consider it pleasurable to revel in the daytime.
 They are spots and blemishes, amusing themselves in their deceit while they {celebrate the agape} feastc with you.
 14Their eyes are full of adultery and they cannot break away from sin.
 They entice unstable souls, having a heart trained in greed, and they are children of cursing.
 15Forsaking the right way, they have gone astray by following the path of Balaam the son of Beor who loved being paid for doing evil.
 16But he was rebuked for his own disobedience: a donkey (who normally does not speak) spoke with a human voice and stopped the madness of the prophet.
 17These people are wells without water, clouds driven by a storm, for whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved forever.
 18With their high-sounding but empty talk, they entice those who are indeed escaping (from those who live in error in the lusts of the flesh) by [promoting] licentiousness.
 19They promise them freedom while they themselves are slaves of corruption; for whoever is overcome by something is brought into slavery by what has overcome him.
 20If, after they have escaped the defilement of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in it and overcome [by it], their last state has become worse than the first! 21It would be better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, rather than, after knowing it, to turn away from the holy commandment delivered to them.
d 22It has happened to them according to the true proverb, “The dog returns to his own vomit”e and “the swine that had been washed [has returned] to wallowing in the mire.
” a Compare Revelation 2:12-26 Or “dignitaries,” an obscure text which could be a reference to fallen angels or to sinful Church dignitaries (see also Jude 8-9; Revelation 2:1) c Compare Jude 12 d Compare Matthew 26:24 e Proverbs 26:11 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 510 3 The Lord is not slow This is now, beloved, the second letter that I have written to you and in both of them, I stir up your sincere mind by reminding you 2that you should remember the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets and the commandments of us who are the apostles of the Lord and Savior.
 3First of all, know that in the last days, mockers will come, walking after their own lusts.
 4They will say, “Where is the promise of his coming? Since the days that our forefathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.
” 5But they willfully forget that in the old days, there were the heavens and the earth, formed out of water and through water by the word of God.
 6By means of water, the world of old was flooded with water and perished.
 7But by the same word, the heavens and the earth that exist now have been reserved for the fire of the day of judgment and for the destruction of those who are ungodly.
 8Beloved, do not forget that with the Lord, one day is as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day! 9The Lord is not slow concerning his promise, as some people think that he is.
 Instead, he is patient with us, not wishing that any should perish but that all should come to repentance.
 10But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night and in this day, the heavens will pass away with a rushing noise, the elements will be dissolved by intense heat, and the earth and the works that are in it will be burned up.
a 11Therefore, since all these things will be destroyed in this way, what kind of people should you be in terms of holy living and godliness! 12You should look for and eagerly desire the coming of the day of God, which will cause the burning heavens to be dissolved and the elements to melt with intense heat! 13But, according to his promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness is at home.
 Call to watchfulness 14Therefore, beloved, as you look for these things, do your utmost to be found in peace, without blemish and blameless in his sight.
 15Consider the patience of our Lord as salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also wrote to youb with the wisdom given to him.
 16He does so in all his letters, speaking of these things.
 However, his letters contain some things that are hard to understand, which the untaught and unstable twist to their own destruction, as they also do to with the other Scriptures.
 17Beloved, since you know these things in advance, be careful and fear that being carried a b CT reads “will be discovered” which seems a more likely reading.
 See also Hebrews 1:10-12 Perhaps an indication that this letter was addressed to the Jewish members of a Pauline community EPISTLE OF PETER 2 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΠΕΤΡΟΥ B away with the error of the wicked, you might fall from your own secure position.
 18Instead, grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
 To him be the glory, both now and unto ages of ages.
 Amen.
 have written to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning.
f I have written to you, young men, because you are strong; and the word of God remains in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
 Those who love the world 15Do not love the world or the things that are in the world.
 The love of the Father is not in those who love the world; 16because everything that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, pride in possessions, is a Or “know” Or “remain” c The Greek expression is “walk just as he walked” d Or “word” e Or “walks” f Greek avrch/j as in John 1:1 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 514 not from the Father but from the world.
 17The world is passing away with its lusts, but the one who does the will of God remains forever.
 The Antichrist - Many antichrists 18Children, this is the last hour! As you have heard, the Antichrist is coming and even now many antichrists have arisen.
 This is how we know that it is the final hour.
 19They went out from us, but they did not belong to us! If they had belonged to us, they would have continued with us.
 But [in fact] they left, so that it might be revealed that none of them belonged to us! 20You have an anointing from the Holy Onea and you perceive all things.
b 21I have not written to you because you do not perceive the truth, but because you perceive it, and because no lie is of the truth.
 22Who is the liar? Is it not anyone who denies that Jesus is the Christ?c This is the Antichrist: the one who denies the Father and the Son.
 23Whoever denies the Son does not have the Father.
d The anointing remains 24As for you, what you have heard since the beginning should remain in you.
 If what you have heard since the beginning remains in you, you also will remain in the Son and in the Father.
 25This is the promise which he promised us: eternal life.
 26I have written to you these things concerning those who would lead you astray.
 27As for you, the anointing which you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to teach you.
 His anointing teaches you about all things; [his anointing] is true, not a lie.
 You will remain in him, just as the anointing has taught you.
 28Now, little children, remain in him so that when hee appears, we may have boldness and not be ashamed before him when he comes.
 29If you understand that he is righteous, you also understand that everyone who practices righteousness is born of him.
 3 God’s children - We will be like him Behold, how great a love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called God’s children!f For this reason, the world does not understandg us, because it did not understand him.
 2Beloved, we are already God’s a Either a reference to Christ or to God the Father Or, “know what is true.
” Or, “know all things (TR/MT),” “you all know” (CT) c Or “Anointed” d TR and CT add “but whoever confesses the Son also has the Father” e Almost certainly a reference to Christ f CT adds “and [so] we are” g Or “recognize / acknowledge” b EPISTLE OF JOHN 1 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ Α children, but what we will be is not yet revealed.
 But when he is revealed, we know that we will be like him; for we will see him just as he is! 3Everyone who has this hope set on him purifies himself, just as hea is pure.
 Sin is lawlessness 4Everyone who sins breaks the law and in fact, sin is lawlessness.
 5You know that Christb was revealed to take away our sins, and in him there is no sin.
 6Whoever remains in him does not continue in sin, but whoever practices sin has not seen him and does not know him.
 7Little children, let no one lead you astray.
 Everyone who does what is right is righteous, just as he is righteous.
 8Whoever lives in sin belongs to the devil, since the devil has been a sinner from the beginning.
 This was the purpose of the manifestation of the Son of God, to undo the work of the devil.
 9Those who have been born of God do not keep on sinning because God’s seed abides in them.
 They cannot go on sinning, because they have been born of God.
 10This is how the children of God and the children of the devil are revealed: whoever does not practice righteousness is not of God, and neither is the one who does not love his brother [or sister].
 We should love one another in deed and truth 11This is the message which you heard from the beginning: that we should love one another! 12We should not be like Cain who was of the evil one and who killed his brother [Abel].
 Why did he kill him? Because his works were evil, while his brother’s works were righteous.
 13Do not be surprised, my brethren, if the world hates you.
 14We know that we have passed out of death into life because we love the brethren.
 Whoever does not love his brother [or sister] remains in death.
 15Whoever hates his brother [or sister] is a murderer, and you know that eternal life does not remain in a murderer.
 16This is how we know what love is: that he laid down his life for us.
 We too should lay down our lives for the brethren.
 17But if someone is well-off in worldly possessions and sees one of the brethren in need and yet refuses to help, how does the love of God remain in such a person?c 18My little children, let us not love only in word or speech, but in deed and truth.
 19This is how we know that we are of the truth and obtain assurance in his presence; 20even if our own hearts condemn us, God is greater than this and knows all things.
 21Beloved, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have boldness toward God.
 22Whatever we ask, we receive from him because we keep his commandments and do what is pleasing in his sight.
 23This is his a Almost certainly a reference to Christ Greek “he” c Compare James 2:14-18 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 516 commandment: that we should believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we should love one another, even as he commanded.
 24All who obey his commandments remain in him, and he remains in them.
 By this, we know that he remains in us, by the Spirit that he has given us.
 4 Spiritual discernment Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to determine whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
 2This is how you can discern the Spirita of God: every spirit who confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God.
 3But every spirit who does not confess Jesus Christ as having come in the fleshb is not from God, and this is the spirit of the Antichrist which you have heard is coming, and is already in the world.
 4You are of God, dear children and you have overcome these worldly peoplec because the one who is in you is greater is than the one who is in the world.
 5These people are of the world.
 Therefore, they speak according to [the spirit of] the world, and the world listens to them.
 6We are of God: Whoever knows God listens to us.
 Whoever is not of God does not listen to us.
 By this we can discern the spirit of truth and the spirit of error.
 God is love - No fear in love 7Beloved, let us love one another because love is from God.
 Everyone who loves is born of God and knows God.
 8Whoever does not love does not know God, for God is love.
 9This is how God’s love was revealed in us: that God sent his only-begottend Son into the world so that we might live through him.
 10In this is love: not that we loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son as the atoning sacrifice for our sins.
 11Beloved, if God loved us in this way, we also should love one another.
 12No one has seen God at any time, but if we love one another, God remains in us, and his love has reached completion in us.
 13By this, we know that we remain in Gode and he in us, because he has given us [as share] of his Spirit.
 14We have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son, the Savior of the world.
 15God remains in those who confess that Jesus is the Son of God, and they remain in God.
 16We know and we believed in the love which God has for us: God is love, and whoever remains in love remains in God, and God remains in him.
 17In this, love has a Or “divine spirit” CT omits “as having come in the flesh” c Greek “them” d Or “unique / uniquely loved” (Greek monogenh) e Greek “him” b EPISTLE OF JOHN 1 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ Α been made perfect among us, so that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because in this world, we are just as he is.
 18There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear is connected with punishment.
 But the one who fears is not yet perfect in love.
 19We love him, because he first loved us.
 20If someone says, “I love God,” and yet hates his brother [or sister], such a person is a liar! If someone does not love the brethren who can be seen, how can such a person [claim to] love God whom he has not seen? 21Indeed, this is commandment we have received from him: that the one who loves God should also love his brethren.
 5 The victory that has overcome the world Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, and whoever loves the Father also loves the one who is born of the Father.
 2By this we know that we love the children of God: by loving God and keeping his commandments.
 3Truly, this is the love of God: that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not burdensome.
 4Everyone born of God overcomes the world! This is the victory that has overcome the world: your faith.
 5And who overcomes the world? Is it not the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 6This is the one who came by water and blood: Jesus Christ; not with water only, but with water and blood.
 It is the Spirit who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.
 7There are three who bear witness <in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these three are one.
 And there are three that testify on eartha>: 8the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and the three agree as one.
 9If we accept human testimony, God’s testimony is greater because this is God’s testimony concerning his {very} Son! 10Whoever believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself, but whoever does not believe God has made God to be a liar, because such a person has not believed the testimony that God has given concerning his Son.
 11This is the testimony: God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his Son! 12Whoever has the Son has {the}b life, but whoever who does not have God’s Son does not have {the} life.
 a Only a few recent manuscripts include this clause known as the comma (“in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these three are one.
 And there are three that testify on earth…”) This passage is undoubtedly an interpolation or later theological comment, but it is part of the Patriarchal Text and therefore included in <> in the main text of the EOB NT.
 b Greek th.
n zwh,n THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 518 13I have written these things to you who believe in the Name of the Son of God, so that you may know that you have eternal lifea and continue to believe in the Name of the Son of God.
 14This is the boldness which we have toward him: if we ask anything according to his will, he listens to us! 15And if we know that he listens to us, no matter what we ask, we [also] know that we have obtained the petitions which we have asked of him.
 Sin that leads to death – Last warning 16If youb see one of the brethren committing a sin that does not leads to death, you should intercede in prayer and God will give life to those brethren whose sin does not lead to death.
 But there is a {typec of} sin that leads to death, and I do not say that you should make a request in this case.
 17All unrighteousness is sin, yet there is a {type of} sin which does not lead to death.
 18We know that whoever is born of God does not practice sin; whoever has been born of God is protected {by God}, and the evil one does not take hold of such a one.
 19We know that we are of God and that the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.
 20We know that the Son of God has come, and he has given us understanding so that we may know him who is true.
 Indeed, we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ.
 This is the true God, and eternal life.
d 21Dear a children, keep yourselves from idols! CT omits the end of the verse Greek “whoever / anyone” c Or “level of” d Compare John 17:3 – throughout John’s writings, the true God and Father is absolutely inseparable from Jesus Christ, so much that ‘true God’ includes both, culminating in Thomas’ confession in John 20:28 (“My Lord and my God!”) b EPISTLE(S) OF JOHN 2 AND 3 - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ B/Γ 2 JOHN (ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ B) 1 The presbyter, to the elect lady and to her children, whom I love in truth; and not I only, but also all those who know the truth.
 2This is for the sake of truth which remains in us and will be with us forever! 3May grace, mercy and peace will be with us, from God the Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
 4I greatly rejoice that I have found some of your children walking in truth, even as we have been commanded by the Father.
 5Now I beg you, dear lady, not as though I wrote to you a new commandment but the one we have had from the beginning: we must love one another! 6This is love: that we walk according to his commandments.
 This is the commandment, as you have heard from the beginning, that you should livea accordingly.
 7Many deceivers have gone out into the world, people who do not confess that Jesus Christ came in the flesh.
 This is the deceiver and the Antichrist.
 8Watch yourselves, so that we may not loseb what we have accomplished but receive a full reward.
 9Whoever does not remain in the teaching of Christ but transgressesc does not have God; but whoever remains in the teaching [of Christ] has both the Father and the Son.
 10If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive or greet such a person.
 11Whoever welcomes such people participates in their evil works.
 12Even though I have many things to write to you, I do not want to do so with paper and ink.
 Instead, I hope to come to you and speak face to face, so that our joy may be complete.
 13The children of your chosen sister greet you.
 Amen.
 a Greek “walk in it” Or “waste” c Or “runs beyond it / goes too far” (CT) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 520 3 JOHN (ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ Γ) 1 The presbyter to Gaius the beloved, whom I love in truth.
 2Beloved, I pray that you may flourish in all things and be healthy, even as your soul is flourishing.
 3I rejoiced greatly when [some of the] brethren came and testified about your truth, even as you walk in truth.
 4I have no greater joy than this: to hear that my children are walking in truth.
 5Beloved, you do a faithful work in all that you accomplish for those who are brethren and strangers.
 6They have borne witness to your love before the Church.
 You will do well to send them forward on their journey in a manner that God would approve, 7because it is for the sake of the Name that they went out, taking nothing from the Gentiles.
 8For this reason, we should receive such [brethren], so that we may be fellow-workers for the truth.
 9I wrote to the Church, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first among them, does not accept what we say.
 10Therefore, if I come, I will call attention to his deeds and how he unjustly accuses us with wicked words.
 Not satisfied with that, he refuses to welcome the brethren.
 He also stops those who would do so and throws them out of the Church! 11Beloved, do not imitate what is evil, but what is good.
 Whoever does good is of God, but whoever does evil has not seen God.
a 12As for Demetrius, he has a good testimony from everyone and of the truth itself; yes, we also testify, and you know that our testimony is true.
b 13I had many things to write to you, but I am unwilling to write to you with ink and pen.
 14Instead, I hope to see you soon and we will speak face to face.
 Peace be to you! The friends greet you.
 Greet the friends by name.
 a “The glory of God is the living man, and the life of man is the vision of God” (Irenaeus, Against the heresies, 4,20,7).
 b Compare John 21:24 EPISTLE OF JUDE - ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΟΥΔΑ JUDE (ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ ΙΟΥΔΑ) 1 Jude,a a servantb of Jesus Christ and brother of James, to those who are called, sanctifiedc by God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ: 2May mercy, peace and love be multiplied to you.
 Reason for writing 3Beloved, while I was very eager to write to you about our common salvation, I felt it needful to write to you in order to encourage you to fight hard for the faith which was once for all delivered to the saints.
 4Indeed, there are certain men who have secretly crept in, people whose condemnation was announced long ago.
 They are ungodly men who turn the grace of our God into indecency, and they deny our only Master, God,d and Lord, Jesus Christ.
 Lessons from the Old Testament 5Even though you already know this, I wish to remind you that the Lord, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, later on destroyede those who did not believe! 6The angels who did not keep their first domain but deserted their own dwelling place, he has also kept in darkness and eternal chains for the judgment of the great day.
 7Likewise, Sodom, Gomorrah and the cities around them had given themselves over to sexual immorality and unnatural relationsf in the same way as these angels.
 They are presented as an example, suffering the punishment of eternal fire.
 8Yet, these people do the same thing: in their delusion, they degrade the flesh, despise authority, and slander the glorious beings.
 9But the archangel Michael, when he struggled with the devil and argued about the body of Moses, did not dare to bring against the devil an evil-speaking judgment, but said, “May the Lord rebuke you!”g 10Yet, these people speak evil of things they know nothing about.
 What they do understand (by natural power, like the a Or “Judah” Or “slave” c CT reads “loved” d Other ancient manuscripts read “our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ” e CT adds “once for all” f Literally “gone after strange flesh” g Compare Zechariah 3:2 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 522 creatures without reason), these things will destroyed them.
 11Woe to them! They have followed the path of Cain, they have thrown themselves after the error of Balaam for the sake of money, and they have perished in Korah’s rebellion.
 12These people are like hidden and rocky reefs in your agape meals, when they feast with you.
 They are shepherds who feed themselves without fear, clouds without water carried along by winds, autumn trees without fruit, twice dead, uprooted.
 13They are wild waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, for whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved to the age.
a 14About these people, Enoch, the seventh from Adam, also prophesied, saying:b Behold, the Lord is coming with ten thousands of his holy ones, 15 to execute judgment on all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their works of ungodliness which they have done in an ungodly way, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.
 16These [people] are grumblers and complainers who pursue their [own] lusts, and their mouth speaks proud things.
 They only show respect of persons in order to gain an advantage.
 Recalling the apostolic teachings 17As for you, beloved, remember the words which have been spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.
 18They said to you that “in the last time there will be mockers, walking after their own ungodly lusts.
” 19These [scoffers] are these ones who cause divisions, because they are sensual and deprived of the Spirit.
 20But you, beloved, keep on building yourselves up in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit.
 21Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ [that leads] to eternal life.
 22Have compassion on some of them, [but] make a distinction.
c 23You can save some of them, snatching them out of the fire with fear,d yet hating even the clothing stained by what is carnal.
 24Now, to him who is able to keep you from stumbling and to present you blameless before the presence of his glory in great joy, 25to God our Savior who alone is wise,e be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and forever and unto all ages.
 Amen.
 a Here, the Greek usually means “forever” or perhaps implies the idea of “for an age” This is a quote from 1 Enoch 1:9 c CT reads “[who are] doubting” instead of “making a distinction” d CT omits “with fear” and after “fire” adds “but on some be having mercy with fear” e CT reads “to [the] only God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord” b INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION (APOCALYPSE) INTRODUCTION TO THE REVELATION OF JOHN AUTHORSHIP AND DATE Unlike the gospel, the book of Revelation or Apocalypse mentions the name of its author, “John” (1:1,4,9; 22:8).
 However, the exact identity of this ‘John’ was unspecified, leading to occasional speculations that the author was another John (i.
e.
 “the presbyter John”) but not the apostle and beloved disciple.
 Already in the mid-third century, St.
 Dionysius of Alexandria could write: Some before us have set aside and rejected the book altogether, criticizing it chapter by chapter, pronouncing it without sense or argument, and maintaining that the title is fraudulent.
 They say that it is not the work of John or a revelation, because it is covered thickly and densely by a veil of obscurity.
 [They affirm that its author is Cerinthus, who, desiring a reputable authority for his fiction, prefixed the name.
.
.
] However, I could not venture to reject the book, as many brethren hold it in high esteem.
 But I suppose that it is beyond my comprehension, and that there is a certain concealed and more wonderful meaning in every part.
 Indeed, if I do not understand, I suspect that a deeper sense lies beneath the words.
 I do not measure and judge them by my own reason.
.
.
 I do not reject what I cannot comprehend, but rather wonder because I do not understand it.
 Therefore that the author was called John, and that this book is the work of one John, I do not deny.
 And I agree also that it is the work of a holy and inspired man.
 But I cannot readily admit that he was the apostle, the son of Zebedee, the brother of James, by whom the Gospel of John and the Catholic Epistle were written.
 For I judge from the character of both and the forms of expression, as well as the entire execution of the book, that it is not his.
 For the evangelist nowhere gives his name, or proclaims himself, either in the Gospel or Epistle… In fact, he did not say, as often in the Gospel, that he was the beloved disciple of the Lord, or the one who lay on his breast, or the brother of James, or the eyewitness and hearer of the Lord.
 Certainly he would have spoken of these things if he had wished to reveal himself plainly.
 However, he says none of them; but speaks of himself as our brother and companion, and a witness of Jesus, and blessed because he had seen and heard the revelations.
 So, I am of the opinion that there were many with the same name as the apostle John, who, on account of their love for him, and because they admired and emulated him, and desired to be loved by the Lord as he was, took to themselves the same surname, as many of the children of the faithful are called Paul or Peter.
 For example, there is also another John, surnamed Mark, mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles.
.
.
 But that it is he who wrote this, I would not say.
.
.
 I think that he THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 524 was some other one of those in Asia; as they say that there are two monuments in Ephesus, each bearing the name of John.
a Citing Papias, Eusebius also expresses the possibility that Revelation may have been the work of a close disciple of the apostles, a man also called ‘John:’ The name John is twice enumerated by [Papias].
 The first one he mentions in connection with Peter and James and Matthew and the rest of the apostles, clearly meaning the evangelist; but the other John he mentions after an interval, and places him among others outside of the number of the apostles, putting Aristion before him, and he distinctly calls him a presbyter.
 This shows that the statement of those is true, who say that there were two persons in Asia that bore the same name, and that there were two tombs in Ephesus, each of which, even to the present day is called John’s.
 It is important to notice this.
 For it is probable that it was the second, if one is not willing to admit that it was the first that saw the Revelation, which is ascribed by name to John.
b This being said, the wider Orthodox tradition has consistently affirmed the direct connection between John of Zebedee and what is known today as the Johannine corpus.
 Indeed, the high priestly theme and paradigm discussed in relation to the gospel is also paramount in the book of Revelation, as its very name (apokalypsis means “lifting of the veil”) indicates.
 There are also unique expressions and concerns (Word of God, relationship with the Jews) that are unique to the Johannine corpus.
 Hence, it is probable that John worked with different secretaries or collaborators (tradition has St.
 Prochoros in the case of Revelation) and that the circumstances affecting the redaction of these works may have been drastically different.
 The book of Revelation may also have been written in Aramaic (or Hebrew) and later on translated in ‘rough Greek.
’ Revelation itself is often dated to 96-98 AD, but is also possible that it is an earlier work or that it includes material going back as far as 50-70 AD, or even from the lifetime of Jesus Christ (1:1).
 FURTHER DISCUSSION OF REVELATION’S DATEc Based on some statements by early writers such as Irenaeus, Victorinus and Eusebius, many commentators have concluded that there is a patristic consensus on a late dating (96-98) for the book of Revelation.
 In his wellreceived “A second Look at the Second Coming,” Orthodox author T.
 L.
 Frazier wrote that “tradition asserts that the Apostle John wrote Revelation while he was exiled to the island of Patmos during the reign of a Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, 7.
25.
1-16 Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, 3.
39.
1-7 c Based on The Early Church and the End of the World, G.
DeMar and F.
 Gumerlock, pp.
 129-135 b INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION (APOCALYPSE) Emperor Domitian, between A.
D.
 91 and 96.
” However, this statement, which is quite typical, only reflects the view of one stream of tradition on this matter.
 A more complete review of the data reveals four different opinions for the redaction of Revelation.
 Saint Epiphanius of Salamis (†403) wrote that “John prophesied in the time of Claudius (41-54).
 This view saw adopted by two sixth century Western commentators (Apringius and Beatus of Liebana) who explain that this view was what “ancient ecclesiastical relatores have taught.
” We should also mention the testimony of Philip Sidetes, a deacon ordained by St.
 John Chrysostom who wrote, citing Papias, that John of Zebedee had died quite early (in context before 58 AD) at the hands of the Jews.
 The second position can be called “Early Date” and places the redaction of Revelation during the reign of Nero (54-68).
 This tradition is supported by ancient Syriac sources and adopted by St.
 Theophilact of Ochrid who wrote that John was on Patmos “thirty-two years after the Ascension of Christ into heaven.
” The third and most commonly adopted view is that Revelation was composed during the reign of Domitian (51-96).
 However, a closer examination of the sources reveals that Irenaeus’ writings are ambiguous and that Victorinus has in mind the publication (not necessarily the original writing) of Revelation under Domitian.
 Finally, a few commentators such as St.
 Dorotheus of Antioch have suggested that John was exiled under Trajan (98-117) which would be considered the “Very Late” position.
 The position taken in the EOB is that Revelation may have been written down in Hebrew or Aramaic at a very early date (41-60) and then widely published in Greek at a later time, close to the end of the first century.
 This approach has a significant impact on how one interprets the prophetic visions, notably the identity of Babylon the Great.
 THEME(S) Revelation is a fitting conclusion to the inspired Holy Scriptures.
 Genesis is recapitulated and fulfilled: it is a vision and celebration of the return to paradise and of the cosmic victory of true and heavenly wisdom manifested in the Word of God as Wisdom, Word and Power of God, but also in the Woman clothed with the sun or in the Tree of life that brings healing, not death.
 The visions vividly illustrate the opposition between what is divine and true, and what is demonic and counterfeit: Christ vs.
 Satan or antichrist, the Bride of the Lamb vs.
 Babylon the Great (perhaps apostate Jerusalem), true vs.
 false Jews, etc.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 526 The opening chapters of Revelation are reminiscent of the liturgical services of ancient Asia Minor and of the memory of St.
 John as “a priest wearing the miter.
” It would seem that “on the Lord’s day,” John experienced an ascent or vision of the reality that underlies the liturgical symbols of the first Temple and of the early Christian basilicas: the high priest, the seven-branched lampstand, the synthronon of the presbyters, incense, etc.
 Indeed those very elements remain essential to the liturgical life of Eastern Orthodoxy.
 Hence, John’s visions are similar to those of Isaiah, Ezekiel and Daniel and reflect concern for pure and true worship, not man-made and oriented towards man but according to the heavenly pattern.
 Inside the first temple Revelation is a timeless and encouraging vision of the restoration and victory of true worship, the bold hope that “to the one who overcomes, I will grant to sit down with me on my throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father on his throne” (3:21).
 Most commentators fall into one of four groups:  Preterists interpret Revelation in relation to its first-century setting.
 In this view, most of the events it relates have already taken place (mainly in connection with the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD).
  Historicists interpret Revelation as presenting a sequence of events from the time of the apostle to the consummation of history.
  Futurists interpret the visions primarily as relevant to the end times and the second coming of Christ.
  Idealists view it as symbolic pictures of such timeless truths as the victory of good over evil.
 INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION (APOCALYPSE) Obviously, these approaches can also be complementary and help provide a polyvalent interpretation of the various symbols used in the book.
 In the paradigm of high priestly temple worship which is essential to understand the book, the key is that: Beyond the veil, the hidden place, was eternity in the midst of the creation, and the veil itself was believed to be a great screen on which history could be seen.
a Another view of the Temple.
 The great Jewish scholar Philo also understood this apocalyptic perspective.
 In his Questions on Exodus, he explained that ‘the veil was the boundary between the visible and invisible creation, that the world beyond the veil was unchanging and without transient events, but that the visible, material world outside the veil was a place of change.
’ In that sense, Revelation is a quintessentially Eastern Orthodox book: the Divine Liturgy assumes the exact same paradigm, which is why we can pray even now: a Margaret Barker - The Great High Priest, pp.
 212-213 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 528 Remembering, therefore, this command of the Savior, and all that came to pass for our sake, the cross, the tomb, the resurrection on the third day, the ascension into heaven, the enthronement at the right hand of the Father, and the second, glorious coming… The Holy place in the First Temple.
 For various reasons, the book of Revelation is not part of the cycle of readings in the Orthodox ecclesiastical lectionary.
 Certainly, excesses and heresies connected with erroneous interpretations of this complex book, especially the thousand-year kingdom, led to greater caution.
 The premillennial interpretation promoted by many early Fathers such as Papias, Justin and Irenaeus was eventually supplanted with an amillennial perspective.
 There are sound historical and biblical reasons for this decision.
 Historically, it seems obvious that Apostolic Tradition, for instance the preaching of Peter and Paul, did not include a teaching in an earthly one-thousand year long reign of Christ.
 Millenarism was never embraced in Rome and Alexandria.
 On biblical grounds, the binding of Satan is connected with the ministry of Christ (Luke 10:18; 11:21-22) and Matthew 12:28 associates the Lord’s exorcisms as evidence that the kingdom of God had “come upon them.
” Also, Luke 17:20-21 indicates that INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION (APOCALYPSE) the coming of the kingdom of God can not be observed, and that it is “among you” (cf.
 Colossians 1:13, John 18:38-39).
 In 381, the Council of Constantinople relied on Luke 1:33 to affirm that the Lord’s kingdom would not be limited in time but that it would have “no end.
” Taking into the fact that Revelation is highly symbolic, especially in its use of numbers, Orthodox interpreters take into account such texts as 1 Chronicles 16:15 and Psalm 50:10 to see in the image of a thousand years a metaphor of fullness.
 Hence, the first resurrection can be connected with our spiritual death and resurrection in Christ (Romans 6:3-6; Ephesians 2:1, 4-7) which is our entrance into the Kingdom by “water and spirit” (John 3:5).
 Likewise, the theme of a New Creation and ‘God’s dwelling with his people’ (Revelation 20-21) can be connected with the incarnation of the Word and the new life brought about by baptism (2 Corinthians 5:17; Galatians 6:15; comparison between Genesis 1 and the accounts of the Lord’s baptism).
 BABYLON THE GREAT Unlike most annotated versions, the EOB footnotes lean toward the view that Babylon of Great is in fact apostate Jerusalem, not Rome.
 One reason for the traditional identification Babylon = Rome may be the adoption of a post-70 date for Revelation’s redaction together with the influence of Tertullian and Irenaeus.
 Irenaeus does not give an explicit identification but his disciple Hippolytus certainly did.
 On the other hand, there is substantial Scriptural data that points to the identification Babylon = Jerusalem, and this view has been supported by a large number of scholars and commentators, from Scott Hahn to Margaret Barker.
 Among the elements being considered is the fact that in Revelation 11:8, the “great city” is the place where the Lord was crucified, i.
e.
 Jerusalem.
 The same expression is applied to Babylon in 17:18 and throughout chapter 18.
 In 18:24, the description “in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints” applies much better to Jerusalem than to Rome, echoing Luke 13:34.
 It should also be noted that Babylon “rules over the kings of the earth,” an expression which seems to fulfill Deuteronomy 15:6; “you shall lend to many nations, but you shall not borrow; you shall reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over you.
” Considering the importance of economic themes throughout Scriptures including Revelation (Jubilees, loans), it is interesting to note that the Hebrew word for “interest” is Nashak which has the following entry in a typical lexicon: THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 530 Mark = mark left by the bite of a snake (Nashak (h5391) naw-shak'; a prim.
 root; to strike with a sting (as a serpent); fig.
, to oppress with interest on a loan).
 Finally, Revelation is consistent with the Johannine contrast between the true Jews (or Israelites) and the false Jews who claim that “they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
”a Hence, the contrast between the fallen earthly Jerusalem and heavenly Zion is best explained by an opposition between the city where the Lord was crucified and the true and heavenly Zion who is Mother of the Living.
 SIGNS BEFORE 70 AD If it is the destruction of Jerusalem that is envisioned in Revelation, the following primary sources are of interest to be aware of the events that took place before the fall of the city in 70 AD.
 According the Roman historian Tacitus (†117): [Before 70,] Prodigies had occurred.
.
.
 In the sky appeared a vision of armies in conflict, of glittering armor.
 A sudden lightening flash from the clouds lit up the Temple.
 The doors of the holy place abruptly opened, a superhuman voice was heard to declare that the gods were leaving it, and in the same instant came the rushing tumult of their departure.
 Yet, few people placed a sinister interpretation upon this.
b The Jewish historian Josephus also kept a record of these unusual events: Thus there was a star resembling a sword, which stood over the city, and a comet, that continued a whole year.
 .
.
.
and at the ninth hour of the night, so great a light shone round the altar and the holy house, that it appeared to be bright day time; which lasted for half an hour.
 This light seemed to be a good sign to the unskillful, but was so interpreted by the sacred scribes, as to portend those events that followed immediately upon it.
.
.
 Moreover, the eastern gate of the inner [court of the] temple, which was of brass, and vastly heavy, and had been with difficulty shut by twenty men, and rested upon a basis armed with iron, and had bolts fastened very deep into the firm floor, which was there made of one entire stone, was seen to be opened of its own accord about the sixth hour of the night.
.
.
 This also appeared to the vulgar to be a very happy prodigy, as if God did thereby open them the gate of happiness.
 But the men of learning understood it.
.
.
 So these publicly declared that the signal foreshowed the desolation that was coming upon them.
 Besides these, a few days after that feast, a certain prodigious and incredible phenomenon appeared: I suppose the account would seem to be a fable, a b Revelation 2:9; 3:9; see also John 8:39-59 Histories, 5.
13 INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION (APOCALYPSE) were it not related by those that saw it; for, before sun-setting, chariots and troops of soldiers in their armor were seen running about among the clouds, and surrounding of cities.
 Moreover, at that feast which we call Pentecost, as the priests were going by night into the inner court of the temple, as their custom was, to perform their sacred ministrations, they said that, in the first place, they felt a quaking, and heard a great noise, and after that they heard a sound as of a great multitude, saying, “Let us leave this place!” Finally, the Jewish Talmud also witnesses to the remarkable phenomena that occurred in the Temple during the Yom Kippur service… There was a strip of scarlet-dyed wool tied to the head of the scapegoat which would turn white in the presence of the large crowd gathered at the Temple on the Day of Atonement.
 The Jewish people perceived this miraculous transformation as a heavenly sign that their sins were forgiven.
 The Talmud relates, however, that 40 years before the destruction of the second Temple the scarlet colored strip of wool did not turn white: The Rabbis taught that forty years prior to the destruction of the Temple the lot did not come up in the [high priest’s] right hand nor did the tongue of scarlet wool become white…a These little known records are also useful to approach the visions of Revelation – which may be visions of Christ himself subsequently revealed to John – with the right balance of symbolism and historicity.
 MYSTICAL PATTERNS In Revelation as in the Gospel of John, the patterns of the Old Testament are continued and fulfilled.
 As in the days of Moses, God’s people is called out from Egypt,b a place of false worship and spiritual deception.
 Revelation makes this parallelism unmistakable but using the symbolism of the plagues (which closely resemble the Ten Plagues) and with this clue: The great city which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified… (11:8) God’s people are called to a tragic departure (literally “exodus”) just as the Lord himself,c but also like Lot and the great crowdd (7:9) who were baptized in Mosese and became God’s covenant people.
 The ancient and recurring call to “get out”a is a matter of salvation: a Tractate Yoma, 39b Hosea 11:1 c Luke 9:31 (see note) d “A mixed multitude went up with them also” (Exodus 12:38) e 1 Corinthians 10:2 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 532 And I heard another voice from heaven saying, "Come out of her, my people, lest you share in her sins, and lest you receive of her plagues.
 (18:4) This warning geographical but also spiritual – Jerusalem is abandoned as a desolate houseb and the Lord’s voice is remembered; “let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains… For false christs and false prophets will rise and show great signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
”c However, this “calling out” – the very meaning of ekklesia - applies also to all the spiritual, political and even economic patterns that threaten the holiness of God’s people in every generation, until this eon comes to an endd at the voice of the Word of God: Behold, I am coming quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every one according to his work (18:19).
 a See for instance Genesis 12:1; 19:14; 31:13; Exodus 11:8 Matthew 23:38; Luke 13:35 – is is the same root as Revelation 17:16; 18:19 c Matthew 24:16, 24 d Hebrews 1:10-12 b INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION (APOCALYPSE) Dormition of the Theotokos (Feast: August 15) By Theophan the Greek, 1392 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT Epitaphios (Tomb / Shroud) Greek, origin unknown 534 REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ REVELATION (ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ) 1 This is the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show to his servants the things which must happen soon.
 He sent it and made it known by his angela to his servant, John, 2who testified about everything that he saw: to the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ.
 3Blessed is the one who reads the words of the prophecy and blessed are those who hear and observeb the things that are written in it, for the time is at hand! Letter to the seven Churches 4John, to the seven Churches that are in Asia [Minor]: May grace and peace be with you from God,c [the one] who isd and who was and who is to come; and from the seven spiritse who are before his throne; 5and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth.
 To him who loves us, washed us from our sins by his blood, 6and made us to be a kingdom, priestsf to his God and Father; to him be the glory and the dominion unto the ages.
 Amen.
 7Behold, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, including those who pierced him.
 All the tribes of the earth will mourn over him.
 It shall be so! Amen! 8“I am the Alpha and the Omegag,h” says the Lord God,i “who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty.
”j a Or “messenger” (here and wherever angel is mentioned) Or “keep” c CT and TR read “from the one” instead of “from God” d In Greek o` w'n which can also mean “the Existing One” (God’s name in Exodus 3:14) and which is placed in the halo in all the icons of Christ.
 e Sometimes capitalized as “Spirits” f TR reads “kings and priests” - Exodus 19:6; Isaias (Isaiah) 61:6 g Greek ᾿Εγώ εἰμι τὸ Α καὶ τὸ Ω h TR adds “the Beginning and the End” i TR omits “God” j Greek o` pantokra,twr b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 536 In the Spirit on the Lord’s day – The vision of the son of man 9I John, your brother and partner with you in oppression, in the Kingdom, and in perseverance in Christ Jesus,a was on the island called Patmos because of God’s Word and the testimony of Jesus Christ.
b 10I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s dayc and I heard behind me a loud voice, like a trumpet 11saying, “dWhat you see, write [it] in a book and send [it] to the seven Churches;e to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.
” 12I turned around to see the voice that had spoken to me.
 Having done so, I saw seven golden lampstands,f 13and among the seveng lampstands was someone like a son of man,h clothed with a robe reaching down to his feet, and with a golden sashi around his chest.
 14His head and his hair were as white as white wool, like snow.
 His eyes were like a flame of fire.
 15His feet were like fine brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace.
 His voice was like the voice of many waters.
 16He had seven stars in his right hand and out of his mouth came a sharp two-edged sword.
 His face was like the sun shining at its brightest.
 17When I saw him, I fell at his feet like a dead man.
 He laid his right hand on me, saying, “Do not be afraid! I am the first and the last, 18and the Living one.
 I was dead, and behold, I am alive unto ages of ages!j Amen;k I have the keys of death and of hades.
 19Therefore, write the things which you have seen, the things which are now and the things which will happen in the future.
 20Write about the mystery of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lampstands.
 The seven stars are the angelsl of the seven Churches and the seven lampstands are seven Churches.
 a CT omits “Christ” CT omits “Christ” c Almost certainly a reference to Sunday d TR adds “I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last” e TR adds “which are in Asia” f Unlike the second Temple, the first Temple had multiple candlestands or menorahs in the Holy place.
 g CT omits “seven” h Daniel 7:13 i Or “belt / girdle” - a sign of his priestly or high-priestly office j Greek eivj tou.
j aivw/naj tw/n aivw,nwn k CT omits “Amen” l Or “messengers / deacon / heavenly counterpart” (here and wherever angels are mentioned) b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ 2 To Ephesus To the angel of the Church in Ephesus write: He who holds the seven stars in his right hand, he who walks among the seven golden lampstands says these things: 2“I know your works, your toil and perseverance, and that you cannot tolerate evil men.
 You have tested those who call themselves apostles although they are not and you have found them to be false.
 3With perseverance you have endured much for my Name’s sake; you havea worked hard and not grown weary.
 4Still, I have this against you, that you have left your first love.
 5Remember therefore from where you have fallen, and repent and do the first works.
 Otherwise, I am coming to you swiftlyb and I will remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent.
 6But you have this: that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
 7Whoever has an ear should listen to what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
 To the one who overcomes, I will grant the right to eat from the tree of life which is in the Paradise of my God.
”c To Smyrna 8To the angel of the Church in Smyrna, write: The first and the last, who was dead and who has come to life says these things: 9“I know your works, your affliction dand your poverty (but you are rich).
 I know the blasphemy of those who say that they are Jews even though they are not; instead, they are a synagogue of Satan.
 10Do not be afraid of what you are about to endure.
 Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison so that you may be tested, and you will have oppression for ten days.
 Be faithful to the point of death and I will give you the crown of life.
 11Whoever has an ear should listen to what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
 The one who overcomes will not be harmed by the second death.
” To Pergamum 12To the angel of the Church in Pergamum, write: He who has the sharp two-edged sword says these things: a Other manuscripts lack “have worked hard and” CT omit “swiftly” c CT and TR read “God” instead of “my God” - Compare 2 Corinthians 12:1-4 d CT omits “affliction” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 538 13“I know your worksa and where you live, which is where Satan’s throne is located.
 You hold firmly to my Name and you have not denied my faith in the days of Antipas my witness,b my faithful one who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
 14But I have a few things against you, because you have there some who hold the teaching of Balaam.
 He was one who taught Balak to throw a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols and to commit sexual immorality.
c 15Likewise, you also have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans which I hate.
 16Repent therefore, or else I am coming to you quickly and I will make war against them with the sword of my mouth.
 17Whoever has an ear should listen to what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
 To the one who overcomes I will give [to eat] of the hidden manna and I will give a white stone.
 On the stone a new name is written, which no one knowsd but the one who receives it.
” To Thyatira 18To the angel of the Church in Thyatira, write: The Son of God, whose eyes are like a flame of fire, whose feet are like fine brass, says these things: 19“I know your works, your love, faith, service, patient endurance and I know that your last works are more abundant than the first ones.
 20But I have this against you, that you tolerate the woman Jezebel who calls herself a prophetess.
 She seduces my servants by teaching them to commit sexual immorality and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
 21I have given her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality.
 22Behold, I will throw her into a bed [of pain] and I will throw those who commit adultery with her into great suffering, unless they repent of her works.
 23I will kill her children with death and all the Churches will know that I am the one who searches the minds and hearts.
 I will render to each one of you according to your deeds.
 24But to the rest of you in Thyatira, those who do not follow this teaching and who do not know what some call ‘the deep things of Satan,’ to you I say this: I am not putting any other burden on you.
 25Nevertheless, hold on to what you have with determination until I come.
 26To the one who overcome and who keep my works to the end, I will give authority over the nations.
 27He will rule the nations with a rod of iron, shattering them like clay pots;e as I also have received of my Father: a CT omits “your works” Greek ma,rtuj, (also meaning martyr) c Compare Acts 15:20 d TR reads “knew” e Psalms 2:9 b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ and I will giveb him the morning star.
 29Whoever has an ear should listen to what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
” a28 3 To Sardis And to the angel of the Church in Sardis write: He who has the seven Spiritsc of God and the seven stars says these things: “I know your works, that you have a reputation of being alive when in fact you are dead.
 2Wake up and hold on to what remains, which were about to die,d for I have not found any of your works perfected before my God.
e 3Remember, therefore, what you have received and heard.
 Keep it and repent! But if you refuse to keep watch, I will come as a thief and you will not know what hour I will come upon you.
 4Nevertheless, you have a few names in Sardis that have not defiled their garments.
 They will walk with me in white [garments] because they are worthy.
 5The one who overcomes will be vested in white garments and I will not blot his name from the book of life.
 I will confess that person’s name before my Father and before his angels.
 6Whoever has an ear should listen to what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
” To Philadelphia 7To the angel of the Church in Philadelphia, write: He who is holy, he who is true, he who has the key of David, who opens and no one can shut, who shuts and no one opens, says these things:f 8“I know your works! Behold, I have set before you an open door, which no one can shut! I know that you have a little power, that you have kept my word and you have not denied my Name.
 9Behold, [consider] those of the synagogue of Satan, who say they are Jews and they are not, but lie.
 Behold, I will make them come and express adoration tog before your feet and they will know that I have loved you.
 10Because you have kept my command to endure, I also will keep you from the hour of testing which is about to come on the whole world, to test those who dwell on the earth.
 11I a CT moves “as I also have received of my Father” to the beginning of verse 28.
 Or possibly “I will appoint him as” c Or “spirits” d PT agrees with TR.
 Some manuscripts (MT) read “which you were about to throw away” while CT reads “which were about to die” e TR reads “God” instead of “my God” f Compa re Isaias (Isaiah) 22:22 g proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 540 am coming quickly! Hold firmly to what you have, so that no one may take your crown.
 12The one who overcomes, I will make a pillar in the sanctuary of my God, from which he shall never be removed.
 On such a person I will write the Name of my God, the name of the city of my God which is the new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from my God, and [I will write] my own new Name.
 13Whoever has an ear should listen to what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
” To Laodicea 14To the angel of the Church in Laodicea, write: The Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, the origina of God’s creation, says these things: 15“I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot.
 I wish that you were cold or hot.
 16But because you are lukewarm and neither hot nor cold, I will spit you out of my mouth.
 17You say, ‘I am rich, I have obtained wealth and I have need of nothing’ and yet you do not know that you are the wretched one, miserable, poor, blind, and naked! 18I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire, so that you may become rich; and white garments, so that you may clothe yourself, and that the shame of your nakedness may not be revealed.
 Buy also ointment to anoint your eyes, so that you may see.
 19As many as I love, I reprove and discipline.
 Therefore, be zealous and repent! 20Behold, I stand at the door and knock.
 If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in and have supper with him, and he with me.
 21To the one who overcomes, I will grant to sit down with me on my throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father on his throne.
b 22Whoever has an ear should listen to what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
” 4 Vision of heavenly worship After these things, I looked and saw a door opened in heaven.
 The first voice that I heard was like a trumpet speaking with me.
 It was saying, “Come up here, and I will show you the things which must happen after this.
” 2Immediately, I was in the Spirit and behold, there was a throne set in heaven, and one sitting on the throne 3who had the appearance of jasper and ruby.
 There was a rainbow around the throne with the appearance of a b Greek avrch.
 (also, beginning, principle, source, ruler) An important passage pertaining to theosis in the New Testament, along with 2 Peter 1:4-5 REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ an emerald.
 4Around the throne were twenty-four thrones, and on the thrones were twenty-four presbyters sitting, vested in white robes, with crowns of gold on their heads.
 5From the throne, lightning, sounds, and thunders came forth.
 There were seven lamps of fire burning before thea throne, which are the seven spirits of God.
 6Before the throne, there was something like a sea of glass, similar to crystal.
 In the center and around the throne, there were four living creatures full of eyes on all sides.
 7The first creature was like a lion, the second creature like a calf, the third creature had a human face and the fourth was like a flying eagle.
 8Each one of the four living creatures had six wings, full of eyes around and within.
 They have no rest day and night, saying: “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is to come!” 9When the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to him who sits on the throne, to him who lives unto ages of ages, 10the twenty-four presbyters fall down before him who sits on the throne and they express adoration tob him who lives unto ages of ages.
 They cast their crowns before the throne, saying: “Worthy are you, our Lord and God,c to receive the glory, the honor, and the power, for you created all things, and because of your willd they existed, and were created!” 11 5 The scroll and the Lamb In the right hand of the one who sat on the throne, I saw a scroll written inside and outside, sealed shut with seven seals.
 2Then I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and to break its seals?” 3But no one in heaven above, or on earth, or under the earth, was able to open the scroll or to look in it.
 4And so I wept much, because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look in it.
 5One of the presbyters said to me: “Do not weep! Behold, the Lion who is of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has overcome; he who opens the book and its seven seals.
” a MT reads “his throne” – PT agrees with CT and TR proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) c Other manuscripts add “and God, the Holy One,” d Or “desire” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 542 6I saw in the center of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the presbyters, a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain.
 He had seven horns and seven eyes,a which are the seven Spiritsb of God sent out into all the earth.
 7Then the Lambc came and took the scroll from the right hand of the one who sat on the throne.
 8When he had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four presbyters fell down before the Lamb, each one having a harp and golden bowls full of incense,d which are the prayers of the saints.
 9They sang a new song, saying: You are worthy to take the book, and to open its seals: because you were slain, and redeemede us for God with your blood, out of every tribe, language, people, and nation.
 10 You have made us kings and priests to our God, and theyf will reign ong earth.
 11I saw and I heard something like the voice of many angels around the throne, the living creatures and the presbyters.
 The number of those speaking was ten thousandsh of ten thousands, and thousands of thousands.
 12They were saying with a loud voice: “Worthy is the Lamb who has been killed to receive the power, wealth, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and blessing!” 13I heard every creature in heaven, on earth, under the earth, on the sea, and everything in them, saying: “To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing, the honor, the glory, and the dominion, unto ages of ages!” 14The four living creatures said, “Amen!”, and the twenty-four presbyters fell down and expressed adoration.
ij a Compare Zechariah 4:10 Or “spirits” c Greek “he” d This indicates that the word presbyter was associated with a priestly office.
 e Or “bought / purchased / ransomed” f TR reads “we will reign” g Or “over” h Or “myriads” i proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) j TR adds “to the one living unto ages of ages” b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ 6 The first six seals – The four horsesa I saw that the Lamb opened one of the sevenb seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying with a voice of thunder, “Come and see!” 2And behold, there was a white horse and its rider had a bow.
 A crown was given to him, and he came forth to conquer and intent on conquering.
 3When the Lambc opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say, “Come!”d 4Then another horse came out, a fiery red one.
 To its rider was given power to take peace from the earth, so that people should kill each other, and a great sword was given to him.
 5When the Lambe opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, “Come and see!” And behold, there was a black horse and its rider had a balance in his hand.
 6I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, “A quart of wheat for a day’s wage and three quarts of barley for a day’s wage! Do not damage the oil and the wine!” 7When the Lambf opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature say, “Come and see!” 8And behold, a pale horse, and the name of its rider was Death,g and Hades followed him.
 He was given authority over one fourth of the earth, to kill with the sword, with famine, with death, and by the wild animals of the earth.
 9When the Lambh opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been killed for the sake of the wordi of God and for the testimony they had kept.
 10They cried with a loud voice, saying, “How long, holy and true Master, until you judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?” 11A long white robe was given to each of them.
 They were told to rest for a while longer, until their fellow-servants and brethren (who would also be killed as they were) should complete their course.
 a Compare Zachariah 1 TR omits “seven” c Greek “he” d TR reads “Come and see!” e Greek “he” f Greek “he” g Greek Qa,natoj h Greek “he” i Or “Word” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 544 12When the Lamba opened the sixth seal,b I saw that there was a great earthquake.
 The sun became black as a coarse sackcloth, and the wholec moon became as blood.
 13The stars of the sky fell to the earth, like a fig tree dropping its unripe figs when it is shaken by a great wind.
 14The sky was removed like a scroll when it is rolled up.
 Every mountain and island was removed from its place.
 15At this, the kings of the earth, the princes, commanding officers, the rich, the strong, every slave and free person sought to hide themselves in the caves and the rocks of the mountains.
 16They said to the mountains and the rocks, “Fall on us, and hide us from the face of the one who sits on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb, 17for the great day of his wrath has come, and who is able to stand?” 7 The 144,000 After this, I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth.
 They were holding the four windsd of the earth so that no wind would blow on the earth, or on the sea, or on any tree.
 2I saw another angel ascend from the rising sun with the seal of the living God [in his hand].
 He cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to harm the earth and the sea, 3saying, “Do not harm the earth, the sea or the trees until we have sealed the slavese of our God on their foreheads!” 4I heard the number of those who were sealed: one hundred forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the children of Israel:f of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed, of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand,g of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand, 6 of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand, of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand, 7 of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand, 5 a Greek “he” TR adds “behold” c TR omits “whole” d Compare Zechariah 2:6; 6:5 (note that “wind” and “spirits” are a translations of the same word, both in Hebrew and Greek.
 Some translations may read “spirits” in Zechariah).
 e Or “servants” f Note that the tribe of Dan (from which the ‘antichrist’ was expected to arise) is omitted.
 g TR repeats “were sealed” throughout verses 5-8 b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand, of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed.
 8 The great multitudea 9After these things I looked, and behold, there was a great multitude which no one could number, out of every nation and of all tribes, peoples, and languages.
 They were standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes and holding palm branches in their hands.
 10They cried with a loud voice, saying: “Salvation [belongs] to our God who sits on the throne and to the Lamb!” 11All the angels were standing around the throne, along with the presbyters and the four living creatures.
 They fell on their faces before his throne and expressed adoration tob God, 12saying: “Amen! Blessing, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power, and might, be to our God unto ages of ages! Amen.
” 13Then one of the presbyters spoke and asked me, “Who are these who are arrayed in white robes, and where did they come from?” 14I told him, “My lord, you know!”c He said to me, “These are those who have come out of the great tribulation.
 They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
 15Therefore, they are before the throne of God and they offer divine serviced to him day and night in his sanctuary.
 He who sits on the throne will tabernaclee with them.
 16They will never be hungry or thirsty any more.
 Neither heat not sun will ever scorch them, 17because the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne is their shepherd.
 He leads them to the springs of the waters of lifef and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.
” a It is possible or even likely that the great multitude of ‘true Israelites’ or ‘spiritual Israel’ is the same as the 144,000.
 This great multitude of true worshipers (from all nations, therefore including Gentiles) is observing the feast of the tabernables in God’s sanctuary as a priestly people.
 Compare Revelation 2:9; 3:9; John 4:23; Galatians 6:16 b proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) c TR omits “My” in which case one could translate “Sir, you know!” d Greek latreu,ousin (in the NT, all latr- forms refer to God exclusively, in the sense of ‘offering a service to God’) e Or “will live / dwell / set his tent” (probably a reference to the feast of the tabernacles which is alluded to in verses 9-10) f TR reads “springs of living water” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 546 8 The seven trumpets - The golden censer When the Lamb opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
 2I saw the seven angels who stand before Goda and seven trumpets were given to them.
 3Another angel came and stood at the altar with a golden censer.
 A lot of incense was given to him, so that the angel should add it to the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar which was before the throne.
b 4The smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, went up before God from the angel’s hand.
 5The angel took the censer and filled it with the fire of the altar, and threw it upon the earth, causing thunder, voices, lightning and an earthquake.
 The first four trumpets 6Then the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
 7The first sounded, and there followed hail and fire mixed with blood, and they were thrown to the earth.
 cOne third of the earth was burnt up and also one third of the trees, along with all green grass.
 8The second angel sounded, and something like a great burning mountain was thrown into the sea.
 One third of the sea became blood, 9one third of the living creatures which were in the sea died, and one third of the ships were destroyed.
 10The third angel sounded, and a great star fell from the sky, burning like a torch.
 It fell on one third of the rivers and on the springs of the waters.
 11The name of the star is “Wormwood”d and one third of the waters became wormwood.
 Many people died from the waters, because they were made bitter.
e 12The fourth angel sounded, and one third of the sun was struck, one third of the moon, and one third of the stars,f so that one third of them would be darkened and the day would not shine for one third of it, and the night in the same way.
 13Then I saw and heard an eagleg flying in mid-heaven, proclaiming with a loud voice, “Woe! Woe! Woe to those who dwell on the a Compare Luke 1:19 Compare Tobit 12:12 c TR omits “One third of the earth was burnt up” d Greek :Ayinqoj as in ‘absynthe’ e Or “poisonous” f The stars are probably a symbol of angels or Churches (or their leaders) g TR reads “angel” b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ earth, because the other voices of the trumpets of the three angels are yet to sound!” 9 The fifth trumpet The fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star from heaven which had fallen to the earth.
 The key to the pit of the abyss was given to him.
 2He opened the pit of the abyss and smoke went up out of the pit, like smoke from an enormous burning furnace.
 The sun and the air were darkened because of the smoke from the pit.
 3Then, out of the smoke, locusts came forth on the earth and power was given to them, as the scorpions of the earth have power.
 4They were told not to hurt the grass of the earth, or anything green or any tree, but only those people who do not have God’s seal on their foreheads.
 5They were given power not to kill them but to torment them for five months.
 Their torment was like the torment of a scorpion, when it strikes a person.
 6In those days, people will seek death and will not find it.
 They will desire to die, but death will flee from them.
 7The locusts had the appearance of horses prepared for war.
 On their heads were something like golden crowns, and their faces were like human faces.
 8They had hair like women’s hair and their teeth were like those of lions.
 9They had breastplates, like breastplates of iron.
 The sound of their wings was like the sound of chariots, or of many horses rushing to war.
 10They have tails like those of scorpions, and stings.
 In their tails, they have power to harm men for five months.
 11They have over them as [their] king the angel of the abyss.
 His name in Hebrew is “Abaddon,”a but in Greek, he has the name “Apollyon.
”b 12The first disasterc is past.
 Behold, there are still two woes coming after this.
 The sixth trumpet 13The sixth angel sounded.
 I heard a voice from the horns of the golden altar which is before God 14saying to the sixth angel who had one trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates!” 15Then the four angels who had been prepared for that hour and day and month and year were released so that they might kill one third of mankind.
 16The number of the armies of the horsemen was twod hundred million;e I heard their number.
 17Then, I saw the horses in the vision, and those who sat on them, having breastplates of fiery red, hyacinth blue, and sulfur a “Abaddon” is a Hebrew word that means ruin, destruction, or the place of destruction “Apollyon” means “Destroyer.
” c Or “woe” d Some Byzantine manuscripts (MT) omit “two” e Literally, “ten thousands of ten thousands” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 548 yellow; and they had the heads of lions.
 Fire, smoke, and sulfur come out of their mouths.
 18By these three plagues, one third of mankind was killed: by the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur which came out of their mouths.
 19Indeed, the power of the horsesa is in their mouths and in their tails, for their tails are like snakes, and these have heads with which they cause harm.
 20The rest of mankind, those who were not killed with these plagues, did not repent of the works of their hands.
 They did not cease expressing adoration tob demons, and idols of gold, silver, brass, stone, and wood, idols which can neither see, nor hear, nor walk.
 21They did not repent from their murders, or sorceries,c or from their sexual immorality, or from their thefts.
 10 The oath of the mighty angel – The command to eat the scroll Then I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven, robed with a cloud.
 A rainbow was on his head, his face was like the sun, and his feet were like pillars of fire.
 2He had in his hand a little open scroll.
d He set his right foot on the sea, and his left on the land.
 3He cried with a loud voice, as a lion roars, and when he shouted, the seven thunders uttered their voices.
 4When the seven thunders sounded, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from heaven saying,e “Seal up what the seven thunders have pronounced, and do not write them!” 5Then the angel I saw standing on sea and land lifted up his rightf hand to the sky.
g 6He swore by the one who lives unto ages of ages, him who created heaven and what is in it, the earth and what is in it, and the sea and what is in it.
 He swore that there would be no more delay.
 7But in the days when the voice of the seventh angel is about to sound, then the mystery of God will be fulfilled, as he has announced to his servants the prophets.
 8Again, the voice I heard from heaven spoke to me and said, “Go, take the scroll which is open in the hand of the angel who stands on the sea and on the land.
” 9So a I went to the angel, asking him to give me the little scroll.
 TR reads “their power” proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) c The word for “sorceries” (pharmakeia) also implies the use of potions, poisons, and drugs d Or “book” e TR adds “to me” f TR omits “right” g Or “to heaven” b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ He answered, “Take it and eat it! It will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth, it will be as sweet as honey.
”a 10I took the little scroll from the angel’s hand and ate it.
 It was as sweet as honey in my mouth, but after eating the scroll, my stomach became bitter.
 11I was told, “You must prophesy again concerning many peoples, nations, languages, and kings.
” 11 The measuring of the temple – The two witnesses (or martyrs) Then a measuring reed like a staff was given to me.
 I was told,b “Arise, and measure God’s sanctuary, and the altar, and those who express adorationc in it.
 2Leave out the court which is outside the sanctuary; do not measure it, for it has been given to the nations.
d They will trample over the holy citye for forty-two months.
 3I will give power to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for one thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.
” 4They are the two olive treesf and the two lampstands who stand before the Lordg of the earth.
 5If anyone desires to harm them, fire comes out of their mouth and devours their enemies.
 Whoever desires to harm them will be killed in this way.
 6They have the power to shut up the sky, so that it may not rain during the days of their prophecy.
 They also have power over the waters, to turn them into blood, and to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they desire.
h 7When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes out of the abyss will attack them, overcome them, and kill them.
 8Their dead bodies will lie in the street of the great city,i which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, and where theirj Lord was crucified.
 9For three and a half days, people from tribes, languages, and nations will look at their dead bodies, and they will not allow their dead bodies to be laid in a tomb.
 10The people of the world rejoice over them and celebrate the event, exchanging gifts because these two prophets tormented the inhabitants of the earth.
 a Compare Ezechiel 3:1-3 TR reads “An angel stood, saying” c proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) d Or “Gentiles” e Compare Luke 21:24 f Compare Zachariah 4 g TR reads “God” h Like Moses and Aaron in Egypt (see also verse 8) i Clearly a reference to Jerusalem (compare 17:18) j TR reads “our” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 550 11After the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered into them, and they stood up on their feet, and those who saw them were terrified.
 12Then Ia heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, “Come up here!” And they went up into heaven in the cloud as their enemies were watching.
 13In that day, a great earthquake occurred and a tenth of the city collapsed.
 Seven thousand people died in the earthquake, and the rest, terrified, gave glory to the God of heaven.
 14The second disaster is past.
 Behold, the third one comes quickly.
 The seventh angel 15The seventh angel sounded, and great voices in heaven followed, saying, “The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdomb of our Lord and of his Christ.
 He will reign unto the ages of ages!” 16Then the twenty-four presbyters who sit on their thrones before God’s throne fell on their faces.
 They expressed adoration toc God and 17said, “We give thanks to you, Lord God, the Almighty, the one who isd and who was, <and who is cominge>; because you have assumed your great power and begun to reign.
 18The nations raged, and your wrath came, as did the time for the dead to be judged.
 The time has come to give their reward your slaves the prophets, and also to the saints and to those who fear your Name, to the small and the great.
 And the time has come to destroy those who destroy the earth!” Vision of the Ark – The woman clothed with the sun 19Then God’s sanctuary in heaven was opened, and the Arkf of the Lord’s covenantg was seen in his sanctuary! Lightnings, sounds, thunders, an earthquake, and great hail followed.
h a CT and TR read “they” intead of “I” TR reads “The kingdoms of the world have become the Kingdoms” c See previous footnote(s) d Greek ὁ ὢν e CT and MT omit “and who is coming” (included in PT and TR) f See EOB volume 1 (Introduction) for a discussion of the typology of the Ark and Mary the Theotokos.
 Note that the chapter break is arbitrary and may obscure the continuity between 11:19 and 12:1.
 g CT and TR read “the Ark of his covenant” h Compare 2 Maccabees 2:4-8 b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ 12 And a great sign was seen in heaven: a womana clothed with the sun! The moon was under her feet and on her head was a crown of twelve stars.
b 2She was with child, crying out in pain, in labor to give birth.
 3Another sign was seen in heaven: Behold, a great red dragon,c having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven crowns.
 4His tail drew one third of the starsd of heaven and threw them down to the earth.
 The dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child.
 5She gave birth to a son, a male child, who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron.
e But her child was caught upf to God, and to his throne.
 6The woman fled into the wildernessg where she has a place prepared by God so that she may be nourished one thousand two hundred sixty days.
 War in heaven 7A war took place in heaven: Michael and his angels made war on the dragon, and the dragon and his angels made war.
 8But they did not prevail, and no longer was there any place found for himh in heaven.
i 9The great dragon was hurled down, the old serpent, he who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world.
 He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
 10Then I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, “Now has come the salvation, the power, and the Kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ! For the accuser of our brethren has been cast down, he who accuses them before our God day and night.
 11They overcame him because of the blood of the Lamb, and because of the word of their testimony.
 They did not love their life, even to death.
 12Therefore, rejoice, heavens, and you who dwell in them! But woe to the earth and to the sea, because the devil has gone down to you, having great wrath, knowing that he only has a short time.
” a The woman (or wife) seems to be Wisdom manifested in God’s people, most obviously and historically in the motherly figures of the Theotokos (as the new Eve) who give birth to Christ and to the Church who gives birth to the Christian race (see below).
 The spiritual conflict is between true, divine and heavenly Wisdom and false, demonic and earthly wisdom symbolized by the serpent.
 Compare Genesis 3:15; Wisdom 7:12; Luke 7:35.
 b Compare Wisdom 7:29-30 c Or “serpent” (Hebrew vx'n – often translated dra,kwn in the LXX, as in Isaias / Isaiah 27:1) d See verse 9; Job 38:7 e See Psalms 2:9; Revelation 2:27 f Compare Acts 8:39; 2 Corinthians 12:2; 1 Thessalonians 4:17 g Compare verses 4-6 with Matthew 2:1-18 and see notes.
 Compare also 1 Peter 1:23; Luke 8:11-12 h CT and TR read “them” i Compare Luke 10:17-20; 11:18-22 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 552 13When the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the earth, he began to persecute the woman who had given birth to the male child.
 14Two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, so that she might fly from the face of the serpent [and escape] into the wilderness to her place and be nourished for a time, and times, and half a time.
 15Then from his mouth, the serpent spewed watera like a river after the woman, so that he might cause her to be carried away by the stream.
 16But the earth helped the woman by opening its mouth and swallowing up the river which the dragon had spewed out of his mouth.
 17The dragon became enraged with the woman and departed to make war with the rest of her seed,b those who keep God’s commandments and hold to the testimony of Jesus.
c 13 The beast with ten horns and seven heads Id then stood on the seashore and saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads.
 On his horns were ten crowns, and on his heads, blasphemous names.
 2The beast which I saw was like a leopard; his feet were like those of a bear, and his mouth was like the mouth of a lion.
 The dragon gave him his power, his throne, and great authority.
e 3One of his heads looked like it had been wounded fatally, but his fatal wound was healed, and the whole earth marveled at the beast.
 4They expressed adoration tof the dragon, because he gave his authority to the beast, and they also expressed adoration to the beast, saying, “Who is like the beast? Who is able to make war with him?” 5A mouth speaking great things and blasphemy was given to the beast,g and authority to make warh for fortytwo months.
 6He opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to slander his Name, and his habitation, and those who dwell in heaven.
 7He was given power to make war against the saints, and to overcome them.
 Authority over every tribe, people,i language, and nation was given to him.
 8All who dwell on the earth will express adoration toj him, everyone whose a Water may be a symbol of the force of chaos, especially manifested in unruly crowds and peoples Compare Genesis 3:15 c TR adds “Christ” d CT reads “He (the dragon)” instead of “I” e Compare Luke 4:5-8 f proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) g Compare Daniel 7 (especially verse 8) h CT and TR read “and authority to continue” i TR omits “people” j See verse 5 b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ name has not, from the foundation of the world, been written in the book of life of the Lamb who has been slain.
a 9Let anyone who has an ear listen: 10If anyone is to go into captivity, he will go into captivity.
 If anyone is to be killed with the sword, he must be killed.
b Here is {a call for} the patient endurance and the faith of the saints.
 The second beast 11Then saw another beast coming up out of the earth.
 He had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke like a dragon.
 12He exercises all the authority of the first beast in his behalfc and makes the earth and those who dwell in it to express adorationd before the first beast, [the one] whose fatal wound had been healed.
 13He performs great signs, even making fire come down out of the sky to the earth in the sight of people.
e 14He deceives thosef who dwell on the earth because of the signs he was granted to perform in front of the beast, saying to those who dwell on the earth that they should make an image to the beast that was wounded by the sword and [yet] lived.
 15It was given to him to give breath to the image of the beast so that it should speak and cause as many as would not express adoration to the image of the beast to be killed.
 16He causes all people, small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to be given marksg on their right hands or on their foreheads.
 17Hence, no one would be able to buy or sell,h unless he has that mark,i the name of the beast or the number of his name.
 18Here is wisdom: let anyone who has understanding calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man.
 His number is six hundred sixty-six.
 a Or possibly (although a less likely translation: “written in the book of life of the Lamb who has been slain since the foundation of the world” b 13:10 TR reads “If anyone leads into captivity, into captivity he goes.
 If anyone will kill with the sword, he must be killed with a sword.
” instead of “If anyone has captivity, he will go into captivity.
 If anyone is with the sword, he must be killed.
” c Or “presence” d See verse 5 e The sign of a false prophet who imitates the ministry of Elias (Elijah) f Some manuscripts (MT) read “my own people” instead of “those” g The Greek word for “mark” is ca,ragma.
 Some translators have suggested “puncture mark.
” This word also means “stamp / image / representation.
” It is however different than the Greek word used in Genesis 4:14 and Ezekiel 9 which is shmei/on.
 The nuances may indicate the intention to make a connection with a coin or currency.
 h A reminder that economic issues (including economic control or freedom) constitute an important theme in the Scriptures (see also James 5:4; the system of the Jubilees as Leviticus 25; Deuteronomy 15; Revelation 6:6).
 i TR adds “or” I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Write, ‘Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.
’” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “so that they may rest from their labors, for their works follow with them.
” of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God who lives unto ages of ages.
 8And the sanctuary was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power.
 No one was able to enter into the sanctuary, until the seven plagues of the seven angels would be finished.
 16 The seven bowls Then I heard a loud voice out of the sanctuary, saying to the sevenf angels, “Go and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God upon the earth!” 2The first [angel] went, poured out his bowl on the earth.
 [At once], a foul and painful sore came upon the people who had [received] the mark of the beast and who had expressed adoration tog his image.
 3The second [angel] poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became blood, as the blood of a dead man, and in the sea, every living thing died.
 a Or “saints” (TR) or “ages” (as in NIV) proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) c TR adds “and behold,” d The Greek is unclear as to the relationship between the sanctuary and the tabernacle.
 It may be possible to insert {which is} after “sanctuary” e Indicating a priestly office f TR omits “seven” g proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ 4The third [angel] poured out his bowl into the rivers and springs of water, and they too became blood.
 5I heard the angel of the waters saying, “You are righteous,a the one who is, [and] who was, the Holy One,b because you have passed judgment.
 6They poured out the blood of the saints and prophets, and you have given them blood to drink.
 They deserve this.
” 7And I heardc the altar saying, “Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments!” 8The fourth [angel] poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was given power to scorch people with fire.
 9They were scorched with great heat and blasphemed the Name of God who has the power over these plagues, but they did not repent and give him glory.
 10The fifth [angel] poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and his kingdom was darkened.
 People gnawed their tongues in agony 11and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and sores, but they did not repent of their works.
 12The sixth [angel] poured out his bowl on the great river, the Euphrates.
d Its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings that come from the sunrise.
e 13Then, I saw three unclean spirits that looked like frogs coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
 14They are spirits of demons who perform [miraculous] signs and go forth to the kings of the whole inhabited earth,f to gather them for the war of the great day of God the Almighty.
 15“Behold, I come like a thief! Blessed is the one who keeps watch and preserves his garments in order not to walk naked and be shamefully exposed.
” 16And the kingsg were gathered to the place which is called in Hebrew, Armageddon.
h 17The seventh [angel] poured out his bowl into the air, and a loud voice came out of the sanctuary of heaven,i from the throne, saying, “It is accomplished!” 18There were lightnings, sounds, and thunders.
 Then there was a great earthquake, such as had not taken place since there were a TR adds “O Lord” TR reads “and who is to be” instead of “the Holy One” c TR adds “another from” d The river which protected and fed ancient Babylon e Greek avnatolh/j h`li,ou f TR reads “kings of earth and the whole inhabited world” g Greek “them” h Some manuscripts (MT) read “Megiddo” i CT omits “of heaven” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 558 humans on the earth, so great and so powerful.
 19And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed.
 Babylon the great was remembered in the sight of God, so that she would be given the cup of wine of the intensity of his wrath.
 20Every island fled away and the mountains were not found.
 21Great hailstones, about the weight of a talent,a fell from the sky on people, and they blasphemed God because of the plague of hail, because this plague is extremely severe.
 17 Babylon the Great and the Beast One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, “Come here! I will show you the judgment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters.
 2The kings of the earth committed sexual immorality with her, and those who dwell on the earth were made drunk with the wine of her sexual immorality.
” 3He carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness.
 I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored animal, [which was] full of blasphemous names, having seven heads and ten horns.
 4The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and decked with gold, precious stones and pearls.
 She held in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of the sexual immorality of the earth.
b 5And on her forehead a name was written, “MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
” 6I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.
 When I saw her, I was filled with great amazement.
 7The angel asked me, “Why do you wonder? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and the ten horns.
 8The beast you saw was, and is not; and it is about to come up out of the abyss and to go into destruction.
 Those who dwell on the earth and whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world will marvel when they see that the beast was, now is not, and yet will come.
c 9This calls for a mind that has wisdom.
 The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sits.
 10They are seven kings.
 Five have fallen, one is, and the other has not yet come.
 When he comes, he must remain for a little while.
 11The beast that was, and is not, is himself also an eighth [king].
 He belongs to the seven and goes to destruction.
 12The ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but a 1 talent is about 34 kilograms or 75 pounds CT and TR read “the impurities of her sexual immorality” c TR reads “and yet is” b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ they receive authority as kings, along with the beast, for one hour.
 13They have one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast.
 14They will wage war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome them, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings;a and those with him are called, electb and faithful.
” 15The angel said to me, “The waters which you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations, and languages.
 16The ten horns which you saw, andc the beast, they will hate the prostitute and make her desolate; they will make her naked, eat her flesh, and will burn her completely with fire.
 17For God has put in their hearts to do what he has in mind, and to be of one mind, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God should be accomplished.
 18The woman whom you saw is the great city,d which reigns over the kings of the earth.
”e 18 The fall of Babylon After these things, I saw another angel coming down out of heaven,f having great authority, and the earth was illuminated with his glory.
 2He cried with a powerfulg voice, saying, “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great! She has become a dwelling-place of demons, a haunt for every unclean spirit, and a shelterh for every unclean and detestable bird! 3Truly, all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality: the kings of the earth have committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth have become rich from the abundance of her luxury.
” 4I heard another voice from heaven, saying, “Come out of her, my people, so that you may have no participation in her sins, and so that you may not receive any of her plagues.
 5For her sins have reached up to heaven,i and God has remembered her iniquities.
 6Give back to her just as she returned,j and repay her double as she did, and according to her works.
 In the cup which she mixed, mix to her double.
 7As much as she glorified herself and lived luxuriously, give her torment and mourning.
 For she says in her heart, ‘I sit as a queen and I am not a widow! I will never see mourning.
’ a Compare 2 Maccabees 13:4; 3 Maccabees 5:35 (The title “King of kings” does not appear as a title for God in the Hebrew Old Testament.
 Instead, it is used of Artaxerxes (Ezra 7.
12) and Nebuchadnezzar (Ezekiel 26:7 and Daniel 2:37).
 See also 1 Timothy 6:15-16 b Or “chosen” c TR reads “and saw on the beast” d Compare 11:18 e Compare Deuteronomy 15:6 f Or “the sky” g TR adds “and loud” h Or “cage” i Or “the sky” j TR adds “to you” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 560 8Therefore, in one day, her plagues will come: death, mourning, and famine; and she will be utterly burned with fire; for the Lord God who has judgeda her is mighty.
 9The kings of the earth, who committed sexual immorality and lived luxuriously with her will weep and wail over her when they look at the smoke of her burning.
 10They will stand far away terrified at her torment, saying: ‘Woe, woe! The great city, Babylon, the city of power! Your doomb has come in one hour.
’ 11The merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, for no one buys their merchandise any more; 12merchandise of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple, silk, scarlet, all expensive wood, every vessel of ivory, every vessel made of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble; 13and cinnamon, incense, perfume, frankincense, wine, olive oil, fine flour, wheat, sheep, horses, chariots, and people’s bodies and souls.
 14The fruits which your soul lusted after have perished from you, and all things that were splendid and sumptuous have been lost to you,c and you will never find them again.
 15The merchants of these things, who were made rich by her, will stand far away terrified by her torment, weeping and mourning; 16saying: ‘Woe, woe! The great city, she who was dressed in fine linen, purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls! 17In an hour such great riches are made desolate.
’ Every shipmaster, and everyone who sails anywhere, and sailors, and all those who earn their living by sea, stood far away.
 18They cried out as they looked at the smoke of her burning, saying: ‘What city was like the great city?’ 19They cast dust on their heads, and cried.
 Weeping and mourning, they exclaimed: ‘Woe, woe! The great city, in which all who had their ships in the sea were made rich by through her wealth!’ For in one hour she has been laid waste! 20“Rejoice over her, O heaven, you saints,d apostles, and prophets, for God has given judgment for you against her!” 21A mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying, “In this way, with violence, Babylon the great city will be thrown down and never more be found.
 22The voice of harpists, musicians, flute players and trumpeters will never more be heard in you.
 No craftsman, of whatever craft, will be found any more in you.
 The sound of a mill will never again be heard in you.
 23The light of a lamp will never more shine in you.
 The voice of the bridegroom and of the bride will never again be heard in you, for your merchants were the princes of the earth, and by your sorcery all the a TR has present tense here.
 Or “judgment” c CT and MT have the phrases “perished from you” and “been lost to you” in reverse order.
 TR reads “been lost to you” in both instances.
 d TR reads “holy apostles” instead of “saints, apostles” b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ nations were deceived.
 24In her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all those who have been slain on the earth.
” 19 The song of victory After these things, I heard something likea the loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, exclaiming, “Alleluia!b Salvation, power, and glory belong toc our God,d 2for true and righteous are his judgments! For he has judged the great prostitute who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, and he has avenged the blood of his servants [who had suffered] at her hand.
” 3A second [voice] said, “Alleluia!e Her smoke shall ascend unto the ages of ages.
” 4Then the twenty-four presbyters and the four living creatures fell down and expressed adoration tof God who sits on the throne, saying, “Amen! Alleluia!”g 5A voice came forth from the throne, saying, “Give praise to our God, all you his servants, you who fear him, small and great!” 6And I heard something like the voice of a great multitude and like the roar of many waters, and like the peal of mighty thunders, saying, “Alleluia!h For the Lordi God, the Almighty, reigns! 7Let us rejoice and be extremely glad, and let us give the glory to him, for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and his bridej has prepared herself!” 8To her it has been granted that she would array herself in bright, pure, fine linen: for the fine linen representsk the righteous deeds of the saints.
 9He said to me, “Write, ‘Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb!’” He also told me, “These are true words of God!” a TR omits “something like” Or “Hallelujah” (“Praise YH” or perhaps “Shine YH,” where YH (“Yah” or “Jah” is a shortened form of the divine Name YHWH) c TR adds “the Lord” d Compare Tobit 13:18 e Or “Hallelujah” f proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) g Or “Hallelujah” h Or “Hallelujah” i CT and TR add “our” j Greek gunh (woman) k Greek “is” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 562 10I fell down before his feet to express adoration toa him.
 But he said to me, “See that you do not do it! I am a fellow-servant with you and with your brethren who hold the testimony of Jesus.
 Express adoration to God, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
”b The King of kings 11I saw the heaven opened, and behold, a white horse! And its rider is called Faithful and True.
 He judges and make war in righteousness.
 12His eyes are a flame of fire, and on his head are many crowns.
 He has names writtenc and a Name written which no one knows but himself.
 13He is clothed in a garment sprinkled with blood, and His Name is “The Word of God.
” 14The heavenly hostsd followed him on white horses, clothed in white, pure, fine linen.
 15Out of his mouth comes a sharp, double-edgede sword by which he should strike the nations.
 He will rule them with an iron rod.
f He treads the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of God, the Almighty.
 16He has on his garment and on his thigh a Name written, “KING OF KINGS,g AND LORD OF LORDS.
” 17Then I saw an angel standing in the sun.
 He cried with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in the sky, “Come! Be gathered together for the supper of the great God!h 18You may eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of captains, the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and riders, and the flesh of all people, both free and slave, small and great.
” 19I saw the beast, the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered together to make war against the one who sat on the horse, and against his army.
 20But the beast was captured, and with him the false prophet who worked the signs in his sight and by which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who expressed adoration toi his image.
 These two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur.
 21The rest were killed with the sword of him who sat on the horse, with the sword which a proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) b Or “Spirit of Prophecy” c TR/CT omits “names written” d Or “armies which are in heaven.
” Sabbaoth meant “of hosts” or “the armies” e CT and TR omit “double-edged” f Psalms 2:9 g Compare 2 Maccabees 13:4; 3 Maccabees 5:35 (The title “King of kings” does not appear as a title for God in the Hebrew Old Testament.
 Instead, it is used of Artaxerxes (Ezra 7.
12) and Nebuchadnezzar (Ezekiel 26:7 and Daniel 2:37).
 See also 1 Timothy 6:15-16.
 h CT reads “great supper of God” instead of “supper of the great God” i proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ came forth out of his mouth.
 And all the birds gorged themselves with their flesh.
 THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 564 The great white throne 11Then I saw a great white throne, and the one seated on it.
 The earth and the skya fled away from his face: no place was found for them.
 12And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne.
b Booksc were opened, and another book was opened: the book of life.
 The dead were judged according to what was written in the books, according to their works.
d 13The sea gave up the dead who were in it, death and hades gave up the dead who were in them.
 They were judged, each one according to his works.
 14Then death and hades were thrown into the lake of fire.
 This is the second death!e 15Anyone who was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.
f 21 The new heaven and new earth Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth have passed away, and the sea is no more.
 2Ig saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared like a bride adorned for her husband.
 3I heard a loud voice out of heaven saying,h “Behold, God’s dwelling is with people! He will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God! 4He will wipe away every tear from their eyes! Death will be no more; neither will there be mourning, crying, or pain any more.
 The first things have passed away.
” 5The one who sits on the throne said, “Behold, I am making all things new!”i He said, “Write, for these words of God are faithful and true!” 6He said to me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega,j the Beginning and the End.
k To whoever is thirsty, I will freely give from the spring of the water of life.
l 7To the one who overcomes, I will give these things.
 I will be a Or “child,” “heir” – Literally “I will be to him -- a God, and he shall be to me -- the son (YLT)” MT adds “and sinners” c The word for “sorcerers” here also includes users of potions and drugs.
 d TR adds “the great” e Compare Hebrews 11:10 f TR omits “twelve” g Greek “he” h 12,012 stadia = or 2,221 kilometers or 1,380 miles.
 TR reads 12,000 stadia instead of 12,012 stadia.
 i The holy is a cube, like the holy of holies.
 j Greek “he” k 144 cubits is about 65.
8 meters or 216 feet l Or “which the angel was using” m Or “lapis lazuli.
” Compare Tobit 13:17 b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 566 the gates was made of one pearl.
 The street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
 22I saw no sanctuary in it, for the Lord God, the Almighty, and the Lamb, are its sanctuary.
 23The city has no need for the sun or the moon to shine, for the very glory of God illuminated it, and its lamp is the Lamb.
 24The nationsa will walk in its light; the kings of the earth bring their glory and honorb into it.
 25Its gates will not be shut by day (for there will be no night there), 26and the nations will come, bringing their splendor and tribute.
c 27Nothing profane will enter into the city, or anyone who causes an abomination or a lie, but only those who are written in the Lamb’s book of life.
 22 The angeld showed me ae river of the water of life, clear as crystal, flowing out of the throne of God and of the Lamb, 2in the middle of it great street.
 On each side of the river was the tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of fruits, yielding its fruit every month.
 The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations, 3and the curse will be abolished.
 The throne of God and of the Lamb will be in the city, and his servants offer him divine service.
f 4They will see his face, and his Name will be on their foreheads.
 5There will be no night, and they need no lamp light, for the Lord God will illuminate them, and they will reign unto ages of ages.
 6The angelg said to me, “These words are faithful and true! The Lord God of the spiritsh of the prophets sent his angel to show to his servantsi the things which must happen soon.
” Epilogue 7“Behold, I come quickly! Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.
” a TR adds “of those who are saved” Some manuscripts (MT) read “of the nations” c Or “glory and honor” d Greek “he” e TR adds “pure” f Greek latreu,sousin g Greek “he” h Sometimes understood “as individual inspirations” – TR reads “holy” instead of “spirits of the” i Or “slaves” b REVELATION TO JOHN (APOCALYPSE) - ΙΩΑΝΝΟΥ ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ 8Now I, John, am the onea who heard and saw these things.
 When I heard and saw, I fell down to express adorationb at the feet of the angel who had shown me these things.
 9He said to me, “See that you do not do it! I am a fellow-servant with you and with your brethren the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book.
 Express adoration toc God!” 10He also said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is at hand.
 11Let the evildoer still do evil, and the unclean still be unclean, and the righteous still do right, and the holy be holy still.
” 12“Behold, I come quickly! My reward is with me, to repay to each one according to his work.
 13I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End!d 14Blessed are those who observee his commandments,f so that they may have accessg to the tree of life and may enter into the city through the gates.
 15But outside are the dogs, the sorcerers, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
 16I, Jesus, have sent my angel to attest these things to you for the Churches.
 I am the root and the offspring of David; the Bright and Morning Star!”h 17The Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” And let everyone who hears say, “Come!” Let everyone who is thirsty come, let anyone who wishes take the water of life freely.
i 18I bear witness to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, may Godj add to him the kplagues which are written in this book.
 19If anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, may Godl take away his part from the tree of life,m and out of the holy city, which are written in this book.
 20He who attests these things says, “Yes, I come quickly!” Amen! Yes, come, Lord Jesus! a TR omits “am the one who” and reverses the word order of “heard and saw” See 19:10 and note c proskuneo can also be translated “worship (in the broad sense),” “venerate,” “fall down in reverence,” “do obeisance” (see NT introduction regarding proskuneo) d TR reverses the order of “the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End” e Or “keep” f CT reads “wash their robes” instead of “do his commandments.
” g Or “right to” h Compare Sirach 50:6; probably a symbol of Christ as High Priest i Or “as a gift” j TR reads “God shall” intead of “May God” k Some manuscripts add “seven” before plagues.
 l TR reads “God shall” intead of “May God” m TR reads “book of life” instead of “tree of life” b THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT 21The a 568 grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints.
a Amen.
 CT reads “the Lord Jesus [be] with all” APPENDICES APPENDICES THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) – NEW TESTAMENT Saint Catherine's Monastery on the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt.
 570 APPENDIX A: PRESBYTERS AND BISHOPS APPENDIX A: ACTS 20:28 - PRESBYTERS AND BISHOPS “overseers” were “elders.
” “Elder” referred to their qualifications whereas “overseer” emphasized their functions as shepherds of the flock.
 It was only in the time of St.
 Ignatius of Antioch that the term “overseer” was exclusively assigned to the leading presbyter of the Church, as opposed to being applied to all the other presbyters as well.
 Hence, we see a change in semantics between the terminology of St.
 Ignatius and the terminology of St.
 Paul (author of Titus) or St.
 Luke (author of Acts), who wrote a generation earlier.
 Undoubtedly, a change in semantics did occur, but the evidence shows that the underlying organization of the Church did not change.
 THE LETTERS OF ST.
 IGNATIUS OF ANTIOCH Ignatius of Antioch was a man who was close in spirit and times to the Apostles.
 Whenever Ignatius uses the term “bishop,” he always applies it to the leading, one-man shepherd of a ‘city-Church’ or “catholic Church.
” Ignatius did not use the term “bishop” as the New Testament does, that is interchangeably with “presbyter.
” Rather, for Ignatius, “bishop” and “presbyter” are clearly separate offices.
 On several occasions, Ignatius refers to the traditional three-fold ministry of “bishop / presbyter / deacon,” in which the term “bishop” (“overseer”) is used for the monarchical proto-presbyter alone: You must all follow the bishop as Jesus Christ follows the Father, and the presbyters as you would the Apostles.
 Reverence the deacons as you would the command of God.
 Let no one do anything of concern to the Church without the bishop.
 Let that be considered an assureda Eucharist which is celebrated by the bishop, or by one whom he appoints.
 Wherever the bishop appears, let the people be there; just as wherever Jesus Christ is, there is the catholic Church.
 (Ignatius, to the Smyrneans) Your most worthy bishop, and through your worthy presbyters Bassus and Apollonius, and through my fellow-servant the deacon Soto, whose friendship may I ever enjoy, inasmuch as he is subject to the bishop as to the grace of God.
 (Ignatius, to the Magnesians, Chapter II) Do not err, my brethren: if anyone follows a schismatic, he will not inherit the Kingdom of God… Take care, then, to use one Eucharist, so that whatever you do, you do according to God: for there is one Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Cup in the union of His Blood; one altar, as there is one bishop with the presbyters and my fellow-servants, the deacons.
 (Ignatius, to the Philadelphians, 3:2-4:1) Furthermore, in spite of occasional assertions that St.
 Ignatius of Antioch was the ‘creator’ or first proponent of the monarchical episcopate, the fact a Sometimes incorrectly translated as “valid” APPENDIX A: PRESBYTERS AND BISHOPS Polybius = Bishop of Tralles [Unnamed] = Bishop of Philadelphia.
 At the very end of the apostolic age, we have six separate Churchesa being governed by monarchical bishops.
 Furthermore, Ignatius of Antioch had never visited any of these other Churches before.
 Yet, they all possessed monarchical bishops before he reached them on his way to Rome.
 With this fact in mind, one cannot help but ask the question: Who appointed all these monarchical bishops, especially in places such as Ephesus, Smyrna, and Philadelphia, over which the Apostle John himself had so recently wielded authority (and over the very same still-living Christians who Ignatius addresses in his epistles)? The most likely and sensible conclusion is that St.
 John himself had appointed these bishops to be the leading shepherds of the Asian city-Churches in his absence.
 Who then had appointed Ignatius as monarchical bishop of far-off Antioch? Given that Antioch was also clearly an apostolic ‘city-Church,’ it seems obvious that another Apostle had appointed his first predecessor to the office of monarchical bishop as well.
 Hence, (as we shall confirm from Scripture itself below), the office of monarchical bishop was established by the Apostles themselves, and was not some later development as some theologians believe.
 This may be well-established for Eastern city-Churches like Antioch and those in Asia, but what about Western Churches? Many have wondered about the fact that Ignatius does not address a “bishop of Rome” or speak to the Romans as he does to the other (Asian) Churches he writes to, telling them to remain faithful to their bishops, etc.
 Yet, we should not conclude that the situation was different in Rome (or in the West), and that Rome was ruled by a ‘college of co-equal presbyters.
’ Ignatius addresses neither a “bishop of Rome” nor a “college of presbyters.
” Actually, he never addresses any presiding authority for the Roman Church, perhaps because of a vacancy in the episcopate or in order to protect the bishop in circumstances of intense persecution.
 However, Ignatius does refer to himself as a monarchical bishop when addressing the Romans, which in itself shows that it was an acceptable and understandable idea.
 He writes: Remember in your prayers the Church of Syria (Antioch), which now has God for its bishop instead of me.
 (Ignatius, to the Romans, Conclusion) a Three of which the Apostle John himself had recently addressed in the Book of Revelation (Ephesus, Smyrna, and Philadelphia), and one which was an unquestionable Apostolic “headquarters” (Antioch).
 APPENDIX A: PRESBYTERS AND BISHOPS This formula strongly implies a different semantic for Church at Philippi, as well as for the other city-Churches of the European West.
 In other words, the ‘Westerns’ were not yet using the term “bishop” to mean the leading presbyter of a Church (e.
g.
 Polycarp), but were still apparently using the original New Testament terminology in which “bishop” and “presbyter” were interchangeable terms.
 This being the case, it is no wonder that Ignatius, Polycarp, and other contemporary (or earlier) patristic sources do not impose the Asian terminology on Rome or the other early Western city-Churches.
 As a result, the solution is a semantic one: there was no ‘later development’ of the office of bishop itself.
 Indeed if we only possessed Polycarp’s “Epistle to the Philippians,” and not Ignatius’ two epistles “To Smyrna” and “To Polycarp” (in which he repeatedly identifies Polycarp as the monarchical bishop of Smyrna,) those who deny the existence of the episcopate would probably argue that Polycarp was merely an ‘equal member’ of the Smyrnean college of presbyters, as opposed to its presiding head.
 However, we find that no early city-Church was ever governed by a ‘college of absolutely equal presbyters.
’ Rather, like the synagogue system that preceded the city-Church, there was always a leading figure who presided as its head.
 And this model becomes even more apparent when we turn to the Scriptural evidence.
 APPENDIX B: MATTHEW 16:18 – CHURCH AND APOSTLES WHAT IS “THE CHURCH?” Defining the word What do we mean when we say ‘Church?’ We often hear or use such expressions as: “There is no salvation outside the Church,” “The Church of Russia,” “The Greek Orthodox Church,” “The Roman Catholic Church,” “The Church is the Body of Christ,” or “Christians should go to Church.
” All contain the term ‘Church,’ but obviously in a very inconsistent way.
 It is agreed that properly speaking, the word ‘Church’ refers to people, not to a building.
 Secondly, it is reasonable to argue that the meaning of the word ‘Church’ should be defined by the Scriptures and its apostolic interpretation found in the writings of the Early Fathers, not by modern usage.
 By searching the New Testament for every occurrence of the word ‘Church’ (or ‘Churches’), one can obtain a clear picture of what it is that God established “by the price of the blood of his own [Son].
”a On the one hand, the Church is an eschatological reality that transcends space and time.
 It could be said that God knows, foreknows and has a relationship with us that is not constrained by the here and now (1 Cor.
 13:12).
 He knows his elect from “before the foundation of the world.
” The early Christian (and orthodox) doctrine of the so-called ‘pre-existence’ of the Church is well established.
b For instance, the Shepherd of Hermas teaches that “She [the Church] was the first of all creation… and the world was made for her”.
c The early homily known as 2 Clement is even more explicit: APPENDIX B: CHURCH AND APOSTLES and call them ‘a Church.
’ “Exiles” and “saints” in Asia or Galatiaa certainly, but not as Church.
 The same can be said of our modern use of ‘Church’ (as in ‘Orthodox Church’) to refer to a worldwide communion of local catholic Churches, what we often call ‘the universal Church.
’ As in the case of regional Churches, there is no ‘universal (worldwide) Eucharist.
’ Because of this, using the word ‘Church’ in the expression ‘universal Church’ (or to say ‘the church needs a new roof’) is certainly convenient and commonplace, but it also improper and potentially misleading.
 ÿ To summarize, the Church, strictly speaking, is the Body of Christ, the eschatological unity of all those who have been united to Christ’s life in all times and places.
 This is the foundational use of ‘Church’ in the New Testament.
 The other proper use for ‘Church,’ in a way that connects with our realm, is in reference to the gathering of Christians from a specific area to celebrate the Eucharist.
 If in Matthew 16:18, the meaning of Church is uncertain, Matthew 18 undoubtedly uses the same word to describe the local community.
 This “whole Church” is the manifestation of the eschatological Church in our world, in our town.
 Beyond that, we have “Churches.
” Church (eschatological = pre-eternal or metaeonic = total).
 Could also be called space-time universal (STU).
 = All the saints or elect throughout space and time.
 Also called ‘Catholic Church’ in the Catechism of the Orthodox Church (COC).
 Church (catholic = local) (a manifestation of the Church in space and time, by the Holy Spirit.
 In RC terminology, a ‘particular Church.
’ = the saints in a particular city or area, defined by their unity in the Eucharist presided by the bishop (now called a diocese or eparchy).
 Churches (regional, space-universal) See Appendix A This is why Orthodox bishops wear a ‘panagia’ around their necks, i.
e.
 an icon of the Mother of Christ who is herself the icon of the Church.
 c In modern Orthodox usage, ‘protopresbyter’ is an honorary rank or title bestowed on a senior priest by his bishop.
 b APPENDIX B: CHURCH AND APOSTLES Eucharistic president of the community, i.
e.
 the bishop.
 Regardless of what title was given to this role or office, it was of apostolic and divine origin.
 In this context, divine means that if Christ chose Peter to be protos (arche is not used) among the Apostles, the identification of the bishop with Peter would be based on a divine order, not on ecclesiastical policy.
a It is true that the terms presbyteros and episkopos were interchangeable, both in the New Testament and in 1 Clement, but we have analyzed this issue in detail in Appendix A.
 Whether called ‘bishop’ or not, there always was a presbyter designated as ‘head of the table’ for the Eucharistic community.
 This office of presidency gave him a powerful representative and symbolic role: the bishop stood at the altar on behalf of the clergy and people.
 Christ and the Church intersected in his personal office because the people are ‘Christ’ and the bishop speaks on behalf of the Great High Priest the words of institution.
 What remains somewhat of a mystery is the nature of the relationship between the protos and his fellow-presbyters.
 As Jerome rightly remarked, a presbyter can do everything a bishop does except ordain.
 As early as the third century, the Apostolic Tradition of Hippolytus of Rome makes the distinction between the authority of the presbyter to “seal” and that of the bishop to actually “ordain:” When one ordains a deacon, he is chosen according to what has been said above, with only the bishop laying on his hand in the same manner.
 In the ordination of a deacon, only the bishop lays on his hand, because the deacon is not ordained to the priesthood, but to the service of the bishop, to do that which he commands… Upon the presbyters, the other presbyters place their hands because of a common spirit and similar duty.
 Indeed, the presbyter has only the authority to receive this, but he has no authority to give it.
 Therefore he does not ordain to the clergy.
 Upon the ordination of the presbyter he seals; the bishop ordains.
b Hence, the bishop is first among equals, but in a way that gives him unique privileges, indeed powers, in the Church and “on behalf of the Church.
”c On the other hand, the bishop depends on other bishops to perform an episcopal consecration, and likewise needs the assent of the presbyterium and the people: With the assent of all, the bishops will place their hands upon him, with the council of presbyters standing by, quietly…d a Peter was always called “an apostle” or “the fellow-presbyter” and “first.
” There was no distinguishing title for his role of presidency and leadership among the Apostles.
 b Apostolic Tradition, 8 c This expression is used of the letter called 1 Clement in Eusebius.
 d Apostolic Tradition, 2 APPENDIX B: CHURCH AND APOSTLES he remembered everyone with whom he had ever been acquainted .
 .
 .
 and the whole Catholic Church throughout the world… These quotes, often poorly translated, are clear enough to establish that ‘Catholic’ could not possibly mean ‘universal’ or ‘worldwide.
’ If it was the case, ‘Catholic’ would mean “which is in every place” and this leads to the conclusion that the Martyrdom of Polycarp would talk about ‘the [which is in every place] Church in every place,’ a meaningless tautology.
a The evidence, then, is that there was no universal ecclesiology in the second and third century.
b When the Western model appeared and developed, the result was to postulate only one ultimate bishop (the pope) in the ‘catholic Church’ (the universal Church).
 St.
 Peter, “head” of the catholic Church Having a correct understanding of what the catholic Church is enables us to think with the mind of the Fathers on this issue, without being affected by the so-called ‘Peter syndrome.
’c We have already expressed primitive Orthodox ecclesiology with this formula: INCARNATION > EUCHARIST <> CATHOLIC CHURCH > PETER > PRESIDENT-BISHOP = ESSENTIAL / ONTOLOGICAL / DIVINE ORDER By comparison, Roman Catholic ecclesiology is explained in Jesus, Peter and the Keys whose introduction by Kenneth Howell offers the universalist equivalent.
 In this model, the bishop is unavoidably absorbed by the papacy: INCARNATION > CHURCH > PAPACYd The major difference resides in what we mean by Church.
 If the Church is in fact a universal, worldwide organism or society, then the Roman Catholic model makes sense.
 Orthodox scholar Alexander Schmemann was very lucid on this point: If the Church is a universal organism, she must have at her head a universal bishop as the focus of her unity and the organ of supreme power.
 The idea, popular in Orthodox apologetics, that the Church can have no visible head a Also in the Liturgy of St.
 Basil: “we pray to You, be mindful of Your holy, catholic, and apostolic Church, which is from one end of the inhabited earth to the other.
” b John Zizioulas’ Eucharist, Bishop, Church offers an in-depth examination of the primary sources.
 c The “Peter Syndrome” is the automatic (and unjustified) application of anything about Peter to the bishop of Rome exclusively.
 This is deeply rooted in Roman Catholic consciousness.
 d Butler et al.
 - Jesus, Peter and the Keys, Introduction, xiv APPENDIX B: CHURCH AND APOSTLES Consider how great power the rock has upon which the Church is built by Christ, and how great power every one has who says, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God”… But when those who maintain the function of the episcopate make use of this word as Peter, and, having received the keys of the kingdom of heaven from the Savior, teach that things bound by them, that is to say, condemned, are also bound in heaven, and that those which have obtained remission by them are also loosed in heaven, we must say that they speak wholesomely if they have the way of life on account of which it was said to that Peter, “Thou art Peter.
.
.
But if he is tightly bound with the cords of his sins, to no purpose does he bind and loose.
a This is not speculative theology – these are basic theological arguments used by Cyprian to dissuade the lapsed from separating from their bishop.
 The same Petrine arguments are expressed in his Epistle to Florentius: Peter answered Him: “You are the Son of the living God.
” Peter speaks there, on whom the Church was to be built, teaching and showing in the name of the Church, that although a rebellious and arrogant multitude of those who will not hear and obey may depart, yet the Church does not depart from Christ; and they are the Church who are a people united to the priest,c and the flock which adheres to its pastor.
 And so, you should know that the bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the bishop; and if any one be not with the bishop, that he is not in the Church, and that those flatter themselves in vain who creep in, not having peace with God’s priests, and think that they communicate secretly with some; while the Church, which is catholic and one, is not cut nor divided, but is indeed a Second Book of the Commentary on the Gospel According to Matthew, Book XII, 14 Epistle XXVI, to the Lapsed c ‘Priest’ (hiereus or sacerdotus) always referred to the bishop, not to the presbyter(s).
 b APPENDIX B: CHURCH AND APOSTLES Cyprian, along with his synod of North African bishops, left no room for doubt: For neither does any of us set himself up as a bishop of bishops, nor by tyrannical terror does any compel his colleague to the necessity of obedience; since every bishop, according to the allowance of his liberty and power, has his own proper right of judgment, and can no more be judged by another than he himself can judge another.
a ÿ Cyprian’s view of a Petrine succession in the episcopate is the view of preNicene Christianity and that of Byzantine/Orthodox theology.
 In The Primacy of Peter, Fr.
 John Meyendorff writes: On the other hand, a very clear patristic tradition sees the succession of Peter in the episcopal ministry.
 The doctrine of St Cyprian of Carthage on the “See of Peter” being present in every local Church, and not only in Rome, is well known.
 It is also found in the East, among people who certainly never read the De unitate ecclesia of Cyprian, but who share its main idea, thus witnessing to it as part of the catholic tradition of the Church.
 St Gregory of Nyssa, for example, affirms that Christ “through Peter gave to the bishops the keys of the heavenly honors,” and the author of the Areopagitica, when speaking of the “hierarchs” of the Church, refers immediately to the image of St Peter.
 A careful analysis of ecclesiastical literature both Eastern and Western, of the first millennium, including such documents as the lives of the saints, would certainly show that this tradition was a persistent one; and indeed it belongs to the essence of Christian ecclesiology to consider any local bishop to be the teacher of his flock and therefore to fulfill sacramentally, through apostolic succession, the office of the first true believer, Peter.
b As Fr.
 Meyendorff demonstrates both in The Primacy of Peter and Byzantine Theology,c this identification of Peter with the bishop continued well after the Great Schism.
 In 1315, Patriarch John of Constantinople explained to the Emperor that he only accepted the episcopal office of the great capital after experiencing an apparition of Christ who said “If you love me, Peter, feed my sheep.
” Meyendorff’s conclusion is especially significant: Its is therefore comprehensible why, even after the schism between East and West, Orthodox ecclesiastical writers were never ashamed of praising the “coryphaeus,” and of recognizing his pre-eminent function in the very a Acts of the Seventh Council of Carthage under Cyprian, (The Judgment of Eighty-Seven Bishops on the Baptism of Heretics).
 This canon does not exclude the possibility of conciliar proceedings against a bishop by his peers.
 b TPOP, p.
 71 c Meyendorff – Byzantine Theology, pp.
 97-99 APPENDIX B: CHURCH AND APOSTLES However, the Eastern Orthodox position, on the basis of Eucharistic ecclesiology, is that the visible Church is the catholic Church and that it has a visible “head” (in a relative sense): the bishop.
a Moreover, if Peter’s successors are “all bishops,” to use Dom Chapman’s admission, then all are indeed “equal by divine right as to their authority.
” As St.
 Jerome puts it: Wherever there is a bishop, whether at Rome or Gubbio, or Constantinople or Rhegium, or Alexandria or Tanis, his worth is the same, and his priesthood is the same.
 The power of riches or the lowliness of poverty does not make him a higher or a lower bishop.
 But all are successors of the Apostles.
b ÿ The ecclesiological question, then, becomes very specific: Is there a particular “successor of Peter” who inherits Petrine primacy over his fellow-bishops, indeed with ‘ordinary episcopal’ authority over them and bishop of bishops? The Roman Catholic answer, expressed in the framework of universal ecclesiology, is yes: the bishop who presides in the “the See of his martyrdom.
” In a document entitled The Primacy of the Successors of Peter in the Mystery of the Church, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (Pope Benedict XI was then Prefect as Cardinal a Eastern Orthodoxy is not opposed to using the term “head,” although cautiously, to refer to other forms of non-Eucharist primacy (e.
g.
 “the head of the Russian Orthodox Church”).
 b Epistle 146 to Evangelus, Migne PL 22:1192, Giles p.
 154.
 Let us note that Jerome sees the bishops as “successors of the Apostles,” not Peter.
 The functional differences of jurisdiction are not denied.
 However, we have seen that Jerome’s views on the episcopate were actually defective.
 APPENDIX B: CHURCH AND APOSTLES In like manner let all men respect the deacons as Jesus Christ, even as they should respect the bishop as being a type of the Father and the presbyters as the council of God and as the college of Apostles.
 Apart from these there is not even the name of a Church.
a Finally, in the very ancient Constitutions of the Holy Apostles, we read: Let the presbyters be esteemed by you to represent the apostles, and let them be teachers of divine knowledge.
b It is important to realize that the Roman Catholic view is somewhat different.
 In Called to Communion, Cardinal Ratzinger (Pope Benedict XVI) concluded his brief review of Orthodox Eucharistic ecclesiology with these words: Orthodox theologians have contrasted the Eucharistic ecclesiology of the East, which they hold up as the authentic model of the Church, to the centralistic ecclesiology of Rome.
 In every local Church, they maintain, the whole mystery of the Church is present when the Eucharist is celebrated.
.
.
 Given this premise, the inference is drawn that the idea of a Petrine office is contradictory…c And yet, ‘the idea Petrine office’ is very much at the center of Orthodox ecclesiology.
 A major cause of disagreement and misunderstanding is that Rome’s emphasis on Petrine succession is universal and therefore ‘one level up.
’ A few pages later, we read: The second point follows from what has been said: the bishop is the successor of the Apostles,d but only the bishop of Rome is the successor of a particular apostle – of Saint Peter – and thus given responsibility for the whole Church.
e On the other hand, the Orthodox service for the reception of converts asks: Do you renounce the erroneous supposition that the Holy Apostles did not receive from our Lord Jesus Christ equal spiritual powers, but that the holy Apostle Peter was their Prince,f and that the Bishop of Rome alone is his successor…g Note: This is not a quote from Paul Owen’s article.
 APPENDIX D: THE FILIOQUE CONTROVERSY Godhead.
 Both East and West are agreed that the Father has a certain priority of position within the Trinity.
 The Father alone is unbegotten and non-proceeding.
 But does the Monarchy, the font of Deity, reside in the Father’s person, or in his Being? Is the Son begotten of the Father’s person, or his Being? Does the Spirit proceed from the Father’s person, or his Being? If, as the Eastern Church insists, the font of Deity resides in the Father’s person, then the Spirit clearly must proceed from the Father alone, since the Son does not possess the Father’s person.
 But if the font of Deity resides in the Father’s Being, then the conclusion may be drawn that the Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, since all are agreed that the Father and the Son are con-substantial, that is, that they are identical in essence.
 Largely due to the influence of Augustine, the Western Church gradually settled on the view that the Spirit proceeds from both the Father and the Son, and eventually the words “and the Son” were added to the text of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed.
 The above summary deserves to be read with extreme care, since the real debate over the filioque is explained with great clarity.
 This is exactly what St.
 Photius had explained in his Mystagogy of the Holy Spirit: If the Father is cause of the hypostases produced from Him not by reason of nature, but by reason of the hypostasis; and if, up to now, no one has It is in the context of admittedly speculative reflection on the mystery of the Trinity that St.
 Augustine, while affirming the Monarchy of the Father, described the Holy Spirit as “the bond of love” between the Father and the Son.
 This is why Augustine taught that the Spirit proceeds “mainly” (principaliter means an original source and implies a secondary source) from the Father, but also from the Son, not only economically but indeed ontologically.
 The following illustration is a generally accepted way to express the Western-Augustinian emphasis: Let us note, however, that the psychological imagery was also used by the second-century apologists, notably Athenagoras of Athens: The understanding and reason (nous kai logos) of the Father is the Son of God.
 But if, in your surpassing intelligence, it occurs to you to inquire what is meant by the Son, I will state briefly that He is the first product of the Father, not as having been brought into existence (for from the beginning, God, who is the eternal mind [nous], had the Logos in Himself, being from eternity instinct with Logos [logikos]; but inasmuch as He came forth to be the idea and energizing power of all material things…a a Apology, Chapter 10 APPENDIX D: THE FILIOQUE CONTROVERSY Mark Bonocore (RC) is also helpful in this admission that: So, to someone coming from this Eastern heritage – indeed, for any Greekspeaker who knows what the term “ekporeusis” implies (i.
e.
, procession from a single source, principal, or cause), the addition of the Latin clause “Filioque” (“and the Son”) seriously challenges, if not totally destroys, the originally-intended meaning of this Creedal statement.
 And we Roman Catholics fully agree and admit this.
 The introduction of the Filioque is clearly a departure from the original intention and design of the A.
D.
 381 version of the Constantinopolitan Creed.
 However, it is not a departure from apostolic orthodoxy.
 In other words, official Roman Catholicism teaches that the Latin procedit used in the Vulgate to translate the Greek ekporeutai had in fact a wider meaning, not only that of ‘having its cause and origin in,’ but “a wide implication.
” In fact, it is explained that procedit was understood as equivalent to proinai, a concept which can be a source of confusion between economy and ontology.
 Bonocore continues: But, if the Western Church agrees with the East that the Spirit proceeds from the Father alone, then what does it mean by “Filioque” –that the Spirit proceeds “from the Father and the Son?” When the West speaks of the Spirit “proceeding” from the Father and the Son, it is referring to something all-together different than “procession” as from a single source (aitia).
 It is not advocating two sources or principals for the Spirit, or some kind of “double spiration,” as is all-too-commonly (wrongly) assumed by many Eastern Orthodox.
 Rather, it is using the term “proceeds” in an altogether different sense.
 And the best way to illustrate the two different senses or uses of the term “proceeds” (Greek vs.
 Latin) is though the following analogy: If a human father and son go into their back yard to play a game of catch, it is the father who initiates the game of catch by throwing the ball to his son.
 In this sense, one can say that the game of catch “proceeds” from this human father (an “aition”); and this is the original, Greek sense of the Constantinopolitan Creed’s use of the term “proceeds” (“ekporeusis”).
 However, taking this very same scenario, one can also justly say that the game of catch “proceeds” from both the father and his son.
 And this is because the son has to be there for the game of catch to exist.
 For, unless the son is there, then the father would have no one to throw the ball to; and so there would be no game of catch.
 And, it is in this sense (one might say a “collective” sense) that the West uses the term “proceeds” (“procedit”) in the Filioque.
 Just as acknowledging the necessity of the human son’s presence in order for the game of catch to exist does not, in any way, challenge or threaten the human father’s role as the source or initiator (aition) of the game of catch, so the Filioque does not deny the Father’s singular role as the Cause (Aition) of the Spirit; but merely acknowledges the Son’s necessary Presence (i.
e.
, participation) for the Spirit’s eternal procession APPENDIX D: THE FILIOQUE CONTROVERSY Based on this clarification, if the verb is proinai, then “though the Son” is orthodox.
 Likewise, “and the Son” (understood as strict equivalent to “through the Son”) is also acceptable.
 However, it is now clear that “and the Son” cannot be added to the Greek verb ekporev- under any circumstance, while even “through the Son” is very problematic.
 FROM THE FATHER THROUGH THE SON? We now arrive at an expression that is acceptable on both sides because of its patristic use: that the Spirit proceeds (procedit-proinai) from the Father through the Son.
 It should also be said that this formula is not excluded by St.
 Photius’ insistence that the Spirit proceeds (ekporev-) from the Father alone.
 Fr.
 Stylianopoulous explains: Photios’ famous formula, “the Spirit proceeds from the Father alone,” intends not to deny the intimate relations between the generation of the Son and the procession of the Spirit, but only to make utterly explicit that the Father alone causes the existence of both the Son and the Spirit, conferring upon them all his being, attributes, and powers, except his hypostatic property, i.
e.
, that he is the Father, the unbegotten, the source, origin, and cause of divinity.
 After reviewing several patristic quotations, Eastern Orthodox apologist Thomas Valentine concludes that “through the Son” is “the typical Eastern formula,” but with this important caveat: The word dia never means “by” in the sense of “by means of,” i.
e.
 as an agent.
 It means through in a non-additive sense — dia is always nonadditive, referring to a tunnelling or channelling effect, like water through a pipe.
 Many Church Fathers use dia as a way of expressing the relationship between the Son and the Holy Spirit — through speaking the Word, the Father exhales the Wind/Spirit (pnevma means both) just as a person speaking exhales wind/air when speaking words.
 There are two primary reasons for which the Orthodox insist that the Creed of 381 should not be modified.
 The first one is that the Creed of Nicea-Constantinople was the common confession of faith, so much that Pope Leo III had it engraved on two plaques on silver and mounted in Rome.
 By altering the common Creed, even without evil or heretical intent, the West created what became a dogmatic difference in the very proclamation of Faith.
 The Arian menace was soon defeated, and the pastoral need for the filioque had disappeared long before the Great Schism.
 The second reason is that the filioque addition goes beyond was written in the Scriptures and by the honored Fathers of the Second Council.
 There can be no doubt that the “Spirit proceeds from the Father” as is taught by our Lord in John 15:26, but this is as far as the Scriptures will go.
 Thomas Valentine (EO) offers a reflection worthy of consideration: APPENDIX D: THE FILIOQUE CONTROVERSY New Jerusalem Bible When the Paraclete comes, whom I shall send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who issues from the Father, he will be my witness.
 New American Bible When the Paraclete comes, the Spirit of truth who comes from the Father — and whom I myself will send from the Father — he will bear witness on my behalf.
 Hence, the reason for the Orthodox insistence that the filioque be removed from the Creed is in fact to foster ecclesial unity and to uphold the Scriptural terminology of the Ecumenical text.
 REVISIONIST THEOLOGY? There is another valid reason for which Orthodox are loath to concede to an acceptable (or even positive) interpretation of the filioque, and that reason is the great difficulty in reconciling Rome’s insistence that the that “[the Father] is the sole origin (arche, aitia) of the ekporevsis of the Spirit” with the constant affirmation that the Spirit “proceeds by a communication of the same singular essence by one eternal spiration from the Father and the Son as from one principle.
” Even though the Vulgate translated ekporevomenon by procedit, the official Clarification explains that in these affirmations, procedit does not means ekporevsis but proienai, so that something different than causal origination is being discussed.
 This is a very subtle nuance, often lost on the masses.
 The consistent wording of Latin theology is as follows: The Father is from no one; the Son is from the Father only; and the Holy Spirit is from both the Father and the Son equally.
 The 4th Lateran Council, 1215, A definition against the Albigenses and other heretics [We] confess that the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from the Father and the Son, not as from two principles, but as from one; not by two spirations but by one.
 The 2nd Council of Lyons, 1274, Constitution on the Procession of the Holy Spirit The Father is not begotten; the Son is begotten of the Father; the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son.
 The Council of Florence, 143845, Decree for the Jacobites The Council of Florence in 1438 explains: “The Holy Spirit is eternally from Father and Son He has his nature and subsistence at once (simul) from the Father and the Son.
 He proceeds eternally from both as from one principle and through one spiration .
 .
 .
 .
 And, since the Father has through 