Why stand you afar off, O Lord?  why do you overlook us in times of need, in affliction?  While the ungodly one acts proudly, the poor is hotly pursued:  the wicked are taken in the craftycounsels which they imagine.
  Because the sinner praises himself for the desires of his heart;  and the unjust one blesses himself.
  4 The sinner has provoked the Lord:  according to the abundance of his pride he will not seek after him:  God is not before him.
 5 His ways are profane at all times;  your judgments are removed from before him:  he will gain the mastery over all his enemies.
  6 For the sinner has said in his heart,  “I shall not be moved from generation to generation without evil1.
His mouth is full of cursing, bitterness and fraud:  under his tongue are trouble and pain.
 He lies in wait with rich men in secret places, in order to kill the innocent:  his eyes are set against the poor.
 He lies in wait in secret as a lion in his den:  he lies in wait to ravish the poor,  to ravish the poor when he draws him after him:  he will bring him down in his snare.
 He will bow down and fall when he has mastered the poor.
 For he has said in his heart, God has forgotten:  God has turned away his face so as never to look.
 Arise, O Lord God; let your hand be lifted up:  Do not forget the poor.
 Why then, has the wicked provoked God?  for he has said in his heart, God will not punish.
 You see it; for you do observe trouble and wrath,  to deliver them into your hands:  the poor has been left to you; you were a helper to the orphan.
Break the arm of the sinner and wicked man:  his sin shall be sought and he shall not be found because of it.
 The Lord shall reign for ever, even unto ages of ages:  you Gentiles shall perish out his land.
  17 The Lord has heard the desire of the poor:  your ear has inclined to the state of their heart;  18 to plead for the orphan and afflicted,  So that one may ever boast upon the earth.
 11 MT – 10 LXXFor the end, a Psalm of David 11:1 In the Lord I have put my trust:  how will you say to my soul, Flee to the mountains as a sparrow?  2 For behold the sinners have bent their bow,  they have prepared their arrows for the quiver,  to shoot secretly at the upright in heart.
  3 For they have pulled down what you had established,  1 Brenton has “continuing without evil” 2 Brenton has “his sin shall be sought for and shall not be found.
” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) 912 (OT) but what has the righteous done?  4 The Lord is in his holy temple,  as for the Lord, his throne is in heaven:  his eyes look upon the poor, his stare examine the sons of men.
  5 The Lord tries the righteous and the ungodly:  He that loves unrighteousness hates his own soul.
  6 He shall rain upon sinners snares, fire and brimstone,  and a stormy blast shall be the portion of their cup.
  7 For the Lord is righteous and loves righteousness;  his face beholds the upright.
 12 MT = 11 LXXFor the end, A Psalm of David, upon the eighth 12:1 Save me, O Lord; for the godly man has failed;  for truth is diminished from among the children of men.
  2 Every one has spoken vanity to his neighbor:  their lips are deceitful, they have spoken with a double heart.
  3 Let the Lord destroy all the deceitful lips,  and the tongue that speaks great words:  4 They have said: We will magnify our tongue;  our lips are our own, who is our master?  5 Because of the misery of the poor,  and because of the sighing of the needy,  now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set them in salvation;  I will speak boldly in him.
16 The oracles of the Lord are pure oracles;  as silver tried in the fire, proved in a furnace of earth, purified seven times.
  7 You O Lord, shall keep us and shall preserve us,  from this generation and for ever.
  8 The ungodly continue to prowl:  according to your greatness the sons of men are greatly exalted.
 13 MT = 12 LXXFor the end, a Psalm of David.
13:1 How long, O Lord, will you forget me? [Will it be] for ever?  How long will you turn away your face from me?  2 How long shall I take counsel in my soul,  having sorrows in my heart daily?  How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?  3 Look on me, hearken to me, O Lord my God:  lighten my eyes, for fear that I sleep in death;  4 for fear that at any time my enemy say,  I have prevailed against him!  My persecutors will exult if ever I should be moved.
  5 But I have hoped in your mercy; my heart shall exult in your salvation.
  6 I will sing to the Lord who has dealt bountifully with me,  and I will sing psalms to the name of the Lord Most High.
 1 Brenton has “I will set them in safety; I will speak to them thereof openly.
” PSALMS 913 (OT)14 MT = 13 LXX1For the end, Psalm of David 14:1 The fool has said in his heart, There is no God.
  They have corrupted themselves, and become abominable in their devices;  there is none that does what is good,  there is not even so much as one.
  2 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the sons of men,  to see if there were any that understood, or sought after God.
  3 They have all gone out of the way,  they have become good for nothing,  there is no one that does good, no not even one.
  Their throat is an open tomb; with their tongues they have used deceit;  the poison of vipers is under their lips,  their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness;  their feet are swift to shed blood:  destruction and misery are in their ways;  and the way of peace they have not known:  there is no fear of God before their eyes.
 4 Will not all the workers of iniquity know,  they eat up my people as they would eat bread?  they have not called upon the Lord.
  5 There were they alarmed with fear, where there was no fear;  for God is in the righteous generation.
  6 you have shamed the counsel of the poor,  because the Lord is his hope.
  7 Who will bring the salvation of Israel out of Zion?  when the Lord brings back the captivity of his people,  let Jacob exult and let Israel be glad! 15 MT = 14 LXXA Psalm of David 15:1 O Lord, who shall sojourn in your tabernacle?  Who shall dwell in your holy mountain?  2 The one walks blameless and works righteousness,  who speaks truth in his heart.
  3 Who has not spoken craftily with his tongue,  neither has done evil to his neighbor,  nor taken up a reproach against those who dwelt nearest to him.
  4 In his sight an evil-worker is despised,  but he honors those who fear the Lord.
  He swears to his neighbor and disappoints him not.
  5 He has not lent his money at interest,  and has not received bribes against the innocent.
  The one who does these things shall never be moved.
 16 MT = 15 LXXA writing of David 1 Romans 3:10-18 follows the LXX over MT THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) 914 (OT) 16:1 Keep me, O Lord; for I have hoped in you.
  2 I said to the Lord, You are my Lord;  for you have no need of my goodness.
  3 On behalf of the saints that are in his land,  he has magnified all his pleasure in them.
  4 As for those who speak in haste, Their weaknesses have been multiplied;  I will by no means assemble their bloody meetings,  neither will I make mention of their names with my lips.
  5 The Lord is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup:  you are he that restores my inheritance to me.
  6 The lines have fallen to me in the best places,  yes, I have a most excellent heritage.
  7 I will bless the Lord who has instructed me;  And my inner being has convictedd me even into the night.
  8 I foresaw the Lord always before my face;  for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
  9 Therefore my heart rejoiced an my tongue exulted;  moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope:  10 because you will not leave my soul in hades,  neither will you suffer your Holy One to see corruption.
  11 You have made known to me the ways of life;  you will fill me with joy with your countenance:  at your right hand there are delights for ever.
 17 LXX = 16 MTA prayer of David 17:1 Hearken, O Lord of my righteousness,  attend to my petition;  give ear to my prayer not uttered with deceitful lips.
  2 Let my judgment come forth from your presence;  let my eyes behold righteousness.
  3 You have proved my heart; you have visited me by night;  you have tried me as with fire and unrighteousness has not been found in me:  That my mouth shall not speak the works of men,  for the sake of the words of your lips I have kept hard ways.
15 Direct my steps in your paths, that my steps may not slip.
  6 I have cried, for you heard me,  O God: incline your ear to me and hearken to my words.
  7 Show the marvels of your mercies,  you that save those who hope in you.
  8 Keep me as the apple of the eye from those who resist your right hand:  you shall screen me by the covering of your wings,  9 from the face of the ungodly that have afflicted me:  my enemies have encircled my soul.
  10 They have enclosed themselves with their own fat:  their mouth has spoken pride.
  11 They have now cast me out and surrounded me:  they have set their eyes so as to bow them down to the ground.
  12 They laid wait for me as a lion ready for prey,  1 Brenton has “I am purposed that my mouth shall not speak amiss.
 As for the works of men, by the words of thy lips I have guarded myself from hard ways.
” PSALMS 915 (OT)and like a young lion dwelling in secret places.
  13 Arise, O Lord, prevent them and cast them down:  deliver my soul from the ungodly:  draw your sword from the enemies of your hand.
1O Lord, destroy them from the earth; scatter them in their life,  though their belly has been filled with your hidden treasures:  they have been satisfied with uncleanness,  and they have left the remnant of their possessions to their young children.
  15 But I shall appear in righteousness before your face:  I shall be satisfied when your glory appears.
 18For the end, a Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord; the words which he spoke to the Lord, even the words of this Song, in the day in which the Lord delivered him out the hand of all his enemies and out the hand of Saul: He said: 18:1 I will love you, O Lord, my strength.
  2 The Lord is my firm support and my refuge and my deliverer;  my God is my helper, I will hope in him;  he is my defender and the horn of my salvation and my helper.
  3 I will call upon the Lord with praises,  and I shall be saved from my enemies.
  4 The pangs of death pressed on me,  and the torrents of ungodliness troubled me exceedingly.
  5 The pangs of hades came around me:  the snares of death encircled me.
  6 When I was afflicted I called upon the Lord and cried to my God:  he heard my voice out of this holy temple; my cry shall enter before him, even into his ears.
  7 Then the earth shook and quaked,  the foundations of the mountains were disturbed,  they were shaken, because God was angry with them.
  8 There went up a smoke in his wrath,  and fire burst into a flame at his presence: coals were kindled at it.
  9 He bowed the heaven and came down:  thick darkness was under his feet.
  10 He mounted on cherubim and flew:  he flew on the wings of winds.
  11 He made darkness his secret place:  round about him was his tabernacle, even dark water in the clouds of the air.
  12 At the brightness before him the clouds passed,  hail and coals of fire.
  13 The Lord also thundered from heaven,  and the Highest uttered his voice.
  14 He sent forth his weapons and scattered them;  he multiplied lightnings and they were confused.
  15 The springs of waters appeared,  and the foundations of the world were exposed, at your rebuke,  O Lord, at the blasting of the breath of your wrath.
  16 He sent from on high and took me,  he drew me to himself out of many waters.
  17 He will deliver me from my mighty enemies,  1 Brenton has “draw thy sword, because of the enemies of thine hand.
” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) 916 (OT) and from those who hate me; for they are stronger than I.
  18 They prevented me in the day of my affliction:  but the Lord was my stay against them.
  19 He brought me out into a wide place:  he will deliver me, because he has pleasure in me.
  20 The Lord will recompense me according to my righteousness;  even according to the purity of my hands will he recompense me.
  21 For I have kept the way of the Lord  and have not wickedly departed from my God.
  22 For all his judgments were before me,  and his ordinances departed not from me.
  23 I shall be blameless with them,  and shall keep myself from my iniquity.
  24 The Lord shall recompense me according to my righteousness,  and according to the purity of my hands before his eyes.
  25 With the holy you will be holy;  and with the innocent you will be innocent.
  26 With the excellent man you will be excellent;  and with the perverse you will show your strength.
  27 For you will save the lowly people,  and will humble the eyes of the proud.
  28 For you, O Lord, will light my lamp:  my God, you will lighten my darkness.
  29 For by you shall I be delivered from a troop;  and by my God I will pass over a wall.
  30 As for my God, his way is perfect:  the oracles of the Lord are tried in the fire;  he is a protector of all those who hope in him.
  31 For who is God but the Lord? And who is a god except our God?  32 It is God that girds me with strength,  and has made my way blameless:  33 who strengthens my feet as the feet of a deer,  and sets me upon high places.
134 He instructs my hands for war:  and you have made my arms as a brazen bow.
  35 You have made me secure in my salvation:  your right hand has helped me and your correction has upheld me to the end;  yes, your correction itself shall instruct me.
  36 You have made room for my goings under me,  and by footsteps did not fail.
  37 I will pursue my enemies and overtake them;  and I will not turn back until they are consumed.
  38 I will dash them to pieces and they shall not be able to stand:  they shall fall under my feet.
  39 For you have girded me with strength for war:  you have beaten down under me all that rose up against me.
  40 you have also shown me the back of my enemies [as they fled];2and you have destroyed those who hated me.
  41 They cried, but there was no deliverer:  even to the Lord, but he hearkened not to them.
  42 I will grind them as the mud of the streets:  and I will beat them small as dust before the wind.
  1 Verses 32-34 are used as vesting prayers when the priest puts on the belt (zone / poyas) 2 Brenton has “And you has made mine enemies turn their backs before me” PSALMS 917 (OT)43 Deliver me from the opposition of the people:  you shall make me head of the Gentiles:  a people whom I knew not served me,  44 at the hearing of the ear they obeyed me:  foreign children cringed before me.
  45 The foreign children became old,  they became lame and fell away from their paths.
  46 The Lord lives; and blessed be my God;  Let the God of my salvation be exalted.
  47 It is God that avenges me,  he has subdued the nations under me! 48 [You are] my deliverer from angry enemies:  you shall set me on high above those who rise up against me:  you shall deliver me from the unrighteous man.
  49 Therefore I will confess to you, O Lord, among the Gentiles,  and sing to your name.
  50 God magnifies the deliverances of his king;  he deals mercifully with David his anointed,  and with his descendants for ever.
 19 MT = 18 LXXFor the end, a Psalm of David 19:1 The heavens declare the glory of God;  the firmament proclaims the work of his hands.
  2 Day to day utters speech,  and night to night proclaims knowledge.
  3 There are no speeches or words in which their voices are not heard.
  4 Their voice is gone out into all the earth,  and their words to the ends of the world.
  5 In the sun he has set his tabernacle;  He comes forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber:  he will exult as a hero1 to run his course.
  6 His going forth is from the height of heaven,  and his goal unto the height of heaven:  no one shall be hidden from his heat.
27 The law of the Lord is perfect, converting souls:  the testimony of the Lord is faithful, instructing infants.
  8 The ordinances of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart:  the commandment of the Lord is bright, enlightening the eyes.
  9 The fear of the Lord is pure,  enduring unto ages of ages:  the judgments of the Lord are true and completely justified.
  10 They are be more desired than gold and precious stone:  sweeter also than honey and the honey-comb.
  11 For your servant keeps to them:  in the keeping of them there is great reward.
  12 Who will understand his transgressions?  purge me from my secret sins; 13 Spare your servant the attack of strangers:  1 Or “giant” (Brenton) 2 Brenton has “His going forth is from the extremity of heaven and his circuit to the other end of heaven: and no one shall be hidden from his heat.
” THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) 918 (OT) if they do not gain the dominion over me,  then shall I be blameless and I shall be clear from great sin.
  14 So the sayings of my mouth and the meditation of my heart shall be pleasing continually before you,  O Lord my helper and my redeemer.
 20 MT = 19 LXXFor the end, a Psalm of David 20:1 May the Lord hear you in the day of trouble;  May the name of the God of Jacob defend you.
  2 May he send you help from the sanctuary,  and help you out of Zion.
  3 May he remember all your sacrifice,  and enrich your whole-burnt-offering.
  4 May he grant you according to your heart,  and fulfill all your desire.
  5 We will exult in your salvation,  and in the name of our God shall we be magnified:  may the Lord fulfill all your petitions.
 6 Now, I know that the Lord has saved his anointed1:  he shall hear him from his holy heaven:  the salvation of his right hand is mighty.
  7 Some glory in chariots and some in horses:  but we will glory in the name of the Lord our God.
  8 They are overthrown and fallen:  but we are risen and have been set upright.
  9 O Lord, save the king: and hear us whenever we call upon you.
 21For the end, a Psalm of David 21:1 O Lord, the king shall rejoice in your strength;  and in your salvation he shall greatly exult.
  2 You have granted him the desire of his soul,  and have not withheld from him the request of his lips.
  3 For you have shielded him with blessings of goodness:  you have set upon his head a crown of precious stone.
  4 He asked life of you and you gave him length of days unto ages of ages.
  5 His glory is great in your salvation:  you will crown him with glory and majesty.
  6 For you will give him a blessing unto ages of ages:  you will make him glad with joy by your countenance.
  7 For the king trusts in the Lord,  and through the mercy of the Highest he shall not be moved.
  8 Let your hand be found by all your enemies:  let your right hand find all that hate you.
  9 You shall make them as a fiery oven at the time of your presence:  the Lord shall trouble them in his anger and fire shall devour them.
  10 You shall destroy their fruit from the earth,  and their descendance from among the sons of men.
  1 Or “Christ” PSALMS 919 (OT)11 For they intended evils against you;  they imagined a device which they shall not be able to accomplish.
  12 You shall make them flee in the end,  And you will confront their face.
  13 Be exalted, O Lord, in your strength:  we will sing and praise your mighty acts.
 22 MT = 21 LXXFor the end, concerning the morning aid, a Psalm of David 22:1 O God, my God, come to my help:  why have you forsaken me?  the account of my transgressions is far from my salvation.
  2 O my God, I will cry to you by day,  but you will not hear:  and [when I will cry to you] by night,  it shall not be considered as folly to me.
  3 But you, the praise of Israel, dwell in a sanctuary.
  4 Our fathers hoped in you; they hoped and you did deliver them.
  5 They cried to you and were saved:  they hoped in you and were not ashamed.
  6 But I am a worm and not a man;  a reproach of men and scorn of the people.
  7 All who saw me mocked me:  they spoke with their lips, they shook the head, saying:  8 He hoped in the Lord: let him deliver him,  let the Lord save him if he takes pleasure in this man.
  9 For you are the one that drew me out of the womb;  my hope from my mother’s breasts.
  10 I have depended on you from the womb:  you are my God from my mother’s womb.
 11 Do not stand far away from me;  for affliction is near and there is no helper.
  12 Many bullocks have surrounded me:  fat bulls have beset me all around.
  13They have opened their mouth against me,  as a ravening and roaring lion.
  14 I am poured out like water and all my bones are loosened:  my heart has become like melting wax.
  15 My strength is dried up like an empty jar;  and my tongue is glued to my throat;  and you have brought me down to the dust of death.
  16 For many dogs have surrounded me:  the assembly of the wicked doers has encircled me:  they have pierced my hands and my feet.
  17 They counted all my bones;  and they observed and gazed at me.
  18 They parted my garments among themselves,  and cast lots for my clothing.
  19 But you, O Lord, do not be distant to help:  be ready to come to my assistance.
  20 Deliver my soul from the sword;  THE EASTERN / GREEK ORTHODOX BIBLE (EOB) 920 (OT) my uniquely loved1 from the power of the dog.
  21 Save me from the lion’s mouth;  in my humiliation, [save me] from the one-horned beast.
 22 I will declare your name to my brothers:  in the midst of the assembly will I sing praise to you.
  23 you that fear the Lord, praise him;  all you descendants of Jacob, glorify him:  let all the descendants of Israel fear him.
  24 For he has not despised nor been angry  at the supplication of the poor;  nor turned away his face from me;  but when I cried to him, he heard me.
  25 I praise you in the great congregation:  I will pay my vows before those who fear him.
  26 The poor shall eat and be satisfied;  and those who seek him shall praise the Lord:  their heart shall live for ever.
  27 All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the Lord:  and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before him.
  28 For the kingdom is the Lord’s;  He is the governor of the nations.
  29 All the prosperous of the earth have eaten and worshiped:  all that go down to the earth shall fall down before him:  my soul also lives to him, 30 and my descendants shall serve him:  the generation that is coming shall be known to the Lord.
  31 They shall declare his righteousness to the people that shall be born,  whom the Lord has made.
 23 MT = 22 LXXA Psalm of David 23:1 The Lord tends me as a shepherd,  There is nothing I shall want2.
  2 In a place of green grass, there he has made me dwell:  he has nourished me by resting waters.
  3 He has restored my soul:  he has guided me into the paths of righteousness, for his name’s sake.
  4 Yes, even if I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death,  I will not be afraid of evils:  for you are with me; [with] your rod and your staff,  these have comforted me.
  5 You have prepared a table before me  in presence of those who afflict me:  you have completely anointed my head with oil;  your cup cheers me like the best wine.
  6 Your mercy also shall follow me all the days of my life:  and my dwelling shall be in the house of the Lord  for length of days.
 1 Greek monogenh/ mou– see NT appendix regarding John 1:18.
 This could to expanded as “uniquely loved [son] or [life/soul]” 2 Or “lack” 