step;  many  botanists,  for  instance,  believe  that  the  fuller's  teazle,  with  its  hooks,  which  cannot  berivalled by any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of the wild Dipsacus; and this amount ofchange may have suddenly arisen in a seedling.
  So it has probably been with the turnspit dog; andthis  is  known  to  have  been  the  case  with  the  ancon  sheep.
    But  when  we  compare  the  dray-horseand  race-horse,  the  dromedary  and  camel,  the  various  breeds  of  sheep  fitted  either  for  cultivatedland  or  mountain  pasture,  with  the  wool  of  one  breed  good  for  one  purpose,  and  that  of  anotherbreed for another purpose; when we compare the many breeds of dogs, each good for man in verydifferent  ways;  when  we  compare  the  game-cock,  so  pertinacious  in  battle,  with  other  breeds  solittle quarrelsome, with 'everlasting layers' which never desire to sit, and with the bantam so smalland elegant; when we compare the host of agricultural, culinary, orchard, and flower-garden racesof plants, most useful to man at different seasons and for different purposes, or so beautiful in hiseyes, we must, I think, look further than to mere variability.
  We cannot suppose that all the breedswere suddenly produced as perfect and as useful as we now see them; indeed, in several cases, weknow that this has not been their history.
  The key is man's power of accumulative selection:  naturegives successive variations; man adds them up in certain directions useful to him.
  In this sense hemay be said to make for himself useful breeds.
The  great  power  of  this  principle  of  selection  is  not  hypothetical.
    It  is  certain  that  several  of  oureminent  breeders  have,  even  within  a  single  lifetime,  modified  to  a  large  extent  some  breeds  ofcattle and sheep.
  In order fully to realise what they have done, it is almost necessary to read severalof the many treatises devoted to this subject, and to inspect the animals.
  Breeders habitually speakof an animal's organisation as something quite plastic, which they can model almost as they please.
If  I  had  space  I  could  quote  numerous  passages  to  this  effect  from  highly  competent  authorities.
Youatt,  who  was  probably  better  acquainted  with  the  works  of  agriculturalists  than  almost  anyother  individual,  and  who  was  himself  a  very  good  judge  of  an  animal,  speaks  of  the  principle  ofselection as 'that which enables the agriculturist, not only to modify the character of his flock, butto  change  it  altogether.
    It  is  the  magician's  wand,  by  means  of  which  he  may  summon  into  lifewhatever form and mould he pleases.
'  Lord Somerville, speaking of what breeders have done forsheep, says:- 'It would seem as if they had chalked out upon a wall a form perfect in itself, and thenhad  given  it  existence.
'    That  most  skilful  breeder,  Sir  John  Sebright,  used  to  say,  with  respect  topigeons, that 'he would produce any given feather in three years, but it would take him six years toobtain head and beak.
'  In Saxony the importance of the principle of selection in regard to merinosheep is so fully recognised, that men follow it as a trade:  the sheep are placed on a table and arestudied,  like  a  picture  by  a  connoisseur;  this  is  done  three  times  at  intervals  of  months,  and  thesheep  are  each  time  marked  and  classed,  so  that  the  very  best  may  ultimately  be  selected  forbreeding.
What  English  breeders  have  actually  effected  is  proved  by  the  enormous  prices  given  for  animalswith a good pedigree; and these have now been exported to almost every quarter of the world.
  Theimprovement  is  by  no  means  generally  due  to  crossing  different  breeds;  all  the  best  breeders  arestrongly opposed to this practice, except sometimes amongst closely allied sub-breeds.
  And when across has been made, the closest selection is far more indispensable even than in ordinary cases.
  Ifselection  consisted  merely  in  separating  some  very  distinct  variety,  and  breeding  from  it,  theprinciple would be so obvious as hardly to be worth notice; but its importance consists in the greateffect produced by the accumulation in one direction, during successive generations, of differencesabsolutely inappreciable by an uneducated eye--differences which I for one have vainly attemptedto appreciate.
  Not one man in a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to becomean eminent breeder.
  If gifted with these qualities, and he studies his subject for years, and devoteshis   lifetime   to   it   with   indomitable   perseverance,   he   will   succeed,   and   may   make   greatimprovements; if he wants any of these qualities, he will assuredly fail.
  Few would readily believein the natural capacity and years of practice requisite to become even a skilful pigeon-fancier.
The same principles are followed by horticulturists; but the variations are here often more abrupt.
No one supposes that our choicest productions have been produced by a single variation from theaboriginal  stock.
    We  have  proofs  that  this  is  not  so  in  some  cases,  in  which  exact  records  havebeen  kept;  thus,  to  give  a  very  trifling  instance,  the  steadily-increasing  size  of  the  commongooseberry may be quoted.
  We see an astonishing improvement in many florists' flowers, when theflowers  of  the  present  day  are  compared  with  drawings  made  only  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago.
When  a  race  of  plants  is  once  pretty  well  established,  the  seed-raisers  do  not  pick  out  the  bestplants,  but  merely  go  over  their  seed-beds,  and  pull  up  the  'rogues,'  as  they  call  the  plants  thatdeviate from the proper standard.
  With animals this kind of selection is, in fact, also followed; forhardly any one is so careless as to allow his worst animals to breed.
In  regard  to  plants,  there  is  another  means  of  observing  the  accumulated  effects  of  selection--namely, by comparing the diversity of flowers in the different varieties of the same species in theflower-garden;  the  diversity  of  leaves,  pods,  or  tubers,  or  whatever  part  is  valued,  in  the  kitchen-garden, in comparison with the flowers of the same varieties; and the diversity of fruit of the samespecies in the orchard, in comparison with the leaves and flowers of the same set of varieties.
  Seehow  different  the  leaves  of  the  cabbage  are,  and  how  extremely  alike  the  flowers;  how  unlike  theflowers of the heartsease are, and how alike the leaves; how much the fruit of the different kinds ofgooseberries  differ  in  size,  colour,  shape,  and  hairiness,  and  yet  the  flowers  present  very  slightdifferences.
  It is not that the varieties which differ largely in some one point do not differ at all inother  points;  this  is  hardly  ever,  perhaps  never,  the  case.
    The  laws  of  correlation  of  growth,  theimportance  of  which  should  never  be  overlooked,  will  ensure  some  differences;  but,  as  a  generalrule,  I  cannot  doubt  that  the  continued  selection  of  slight  variations,  either  in  the  leaves,  theflowers, or the fruit, will produce races differing from each other chiefly in these characters.
It  may  be  objected  that  the  principle  of  selection  has  been  reduced  to  methodical  practice  forscarcely more than three-quarters of a century; it has certainly been more attended to of late years,and  many  treatises  have  been  published  on  the  subject;  and  the  result,  I  may  add,  has  been,  in  acorresponding  degree,  rapid  and  important.
    But  it  is  very  far  from  true  that  the  principle  is  amodern discovery.
  I could give several references to the full acknowledgment of the importance ofthe  principle  in  works  of  high  antiquity.
    In  rude  and  barbarous  periods  of  English  history  choiceanimals were often imported, and laws were passed to prevent their exportation:  the destruction ofhorses  under  a  certain  size  was  ordered,  and  this  may  be  compared  to  the  'roguing'  of  plants  bynurserymen.
  The principle of selection I find distinctly given in an ancient Chinese encyclopaedia.
Explicit rules are laid down by some of the Roman classical writers.
  From passages in Genesis, itis  clear  that  the  colour  of  domestic  animals  was  at  that  early  period  attended  to.
    Savages  nowsometimes cross their dogs with wild canine animals, to improve the breed, and they formerly didso, as is attested by passages in Pliny.
  The savages in South Africa match their draught cattle bycolour,  as  do  some  of  the  Esquimaux  their  teams  of  dogs.
    Livingstone  shows  how  much  gooddomestic  breeds  are  valued  by  the  negroes  of  the  interior  of  Africa  who  have  not  associated  withEuropeans.
    Some  of  these  facts  do  not  show  actual  selection,  but  they  show  that  the  breeding  ofdomestic animals was carefully attended to in ancient times, and is now attended to by the lowestsavages.
  It would, indeed, have been a strange fact, had attention not been paid to breeding, for theinheritance of good and bad qualities is so obvious.
At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical selection, with a distinct object in view, tomake a new strain or sub-breed, superior to anything existing in the country.
  But, for our purpose,a kind of Selection, which may be called Unconscious, and which results from every one trying topossess  and  breed  from  the  best  individual  animals,  is  more  important.
    Thus,  a  man  who  intendskeeping pointers naturally tries to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards breeds from his ownbest  dogs,  but  he  has  no  wish  or  expectation  of  permanently  altering  the  breed.
    Nevertheless  Icannot doubt that this process, continued during centuries, would improve and modify any breed, inthe  same  way  as  Bakewell,  Collins,  &c.
,  by  this  very  same  process,  only  carried  on  moremethodically, did greatly modify, even during their own lifetimes, the forms and qualities of theircattle.
    Slow  and  insensible  changes  of  this  kind  could  never  be  recognised  unless  actualmeasurements or careful drawings of the breeds in question had been made long ago, which mightserve for comparison.
  In some cases, however, unchanged or but little changed individuals of thesame breed may be found in less civilised districts, where the breed has been less improved.
  Thereis  reason  to  believe  that  King  Charles's  spaniel  has  been  unconsciously  modified  to  a  large  extentsince the time of that monarch.
  Some highly competent authorities are convinced that the setter isdirectly derived from the spaniel, and has probably been slowly altered from it.
  It is known that theEnglish pointer has been greatly changed within the last century, and in this case the change has, itis believed, been chiefly effected by crosses with the fox-hound; but what concerns us is, that thechange has been effected unconsciously and gradually, and yet so effectually, that, though the oldSpanish pointer certainly came from Spain, Mr.
 Borrow has not seen, as I am informed by him, anynative dog in Spain like our pointer.
By  a  similar  process  of  selection,  and  by  careful  training,  the  whole  body  of  English  racehorseshave  come  to  surpass  in  fleetness  and  size  the  parent  Arab  stock,  so  that  the  latter,  by  theregulations  for  the  Goodwood  Races,  are  favoured  in  the  weights  they  carry.
    Lord  Spencer  andothers  have  shown  how  the  cattle  of  England  have  increased  in  weight  and  in  early  maturity,compared  with  the  stock  formerly  kept  in  this  country.
    By  comparing  the  accounts  given  in  oldpigeon  treatises  of  carriers  and  tumblers  with  these  breeds  as  now  existing  in  Britain,  India,  andPersia,  we  can,  I  think,  clearly  trace  the  stages  through  which  they  have  insensibly  passed,  and come to differ so greatly from the rock-pigeon.
Youatt  gives  an  excellent  illustration  of  the  effects  of  a  course  of  selection,  which  may  be considered as unconsciously followed, in so far that the breeders could never have expected or evenhave  wished  to  have  produced  the  result  which  ensued--namely,  the  production  of  two  distinctstrains.
    The  two  flocks  of  Leicester  sheep  kept  by  Mr.
  Buckley  and  Mr.
  Burgess,  as  Mr.
  Youattremarks, 'have been purely bred from the original stock of Mr.
 Bakewell for upwards of fifty years.
There is not a suspicion existing in the mind of any one at all acquainted with the subject that the owner  of  either  of  them  has  deviated  in  any  one  instance  from  the  pure  blood  of  Mr.
  Bakewell'sflock,  and  yet  the  difference  between  the  sheep  possessed  by  these  two  gentlemen  is  so  great  that they have the appearance of being quite different varieties.
'If  there  exist  savages  so  barbarous  as  never  to  think  of  the  inherited  character  of  the  offspring  of their  domestic  animals,  yet  any  one  animal  particularly  useful  to  them,  for  any  special  purpose,would  be  carefully  preserved  during  famines  and  other  accidents,  to  which  savages  are  so  liable,and such choice animals would thus generally leave more offspring than the inferior ones; so that inthis case there would be a kind of unconscious selection going on.
  We see the value set on animal seven by the barbarians of Tierra del Fuego, by their killing and devouring their old women, in timesof dearth, as of less value than their dogs.
In plants the same gradual process of improvement, through the occasional preservation of the best individuals,  whether  or  not  sufficiently  distinct  to  be  ranked  at  their  first  appearance  as  distinctvarieties,  and  whether  or  not  two  or  more  species  or  races  have  become  blended  together  by crossing,  may  plainly  be  recognised  in  the  increased  size  and  beauty  which  we  now  see  in  thevarieties  of  the  heartsease,  rose,  pelargonium,  dahlia,  and  other  plants,  when  compared  with  theolder varieties or with their parent-stocks.
  No one would ever expect to get a first-rate heartseaseor dahlia from the seed of a wild plant.
  No one would expect to raise a first-rate melting pear fromthe seed of a wild pear, though he might succeed from a poor seedling growing wild, if it had come from  a  garden-stock.
    The  pear,  though  cultivated  in  classical  times,  appears,  from  Pliny'sdescription,  to  have  been  a  fruit  of  very  inferior  quality.
    I  have  seen  great  surprise  expressed  inhorticultural  works  at  the  wonderful  skill  of  gardeners,  in  having  produced  such  splendid  results from such poor materials; but the art, I cannot doubt, has been simple, and, as far as the final resultis  concerned,  has  been  followed  almost  unconsciously.
    It  has  consisted  in  always  cultivating  thebest  known  variety,  sowing  its  seeds,  and,  when  a  slightly  better  variety  has  chanced  to  appear,selecting it, and so onwards.
  But the gardeners of the classical period, who cultivated the best pear they could procure, never thought what splendid fruit we should eat; though we owe our excellentfruit,  in  some  small  degree,  to  their  having  naturally  chosen  and  preserved  the  best  varieties  theycould anywhere find.
A  large  amount  of  change  in  our  cultivated  plants,  thus  slowly  and  unconsciously  accumulated,explains, as I believe, the well-known fact, that in a vast number of cases we cannot recognise, and therefore  do  not  know,  the  wild  parent-stocks  of  the  plants  which  have  been  longest  cultivated  inour  flower  and  kitchen  gardens.
    If  it  has  taken  centuries  or  thousands  of  years  to  improve  ormodify most of our plants up to their present standard of usefulness to man, we can understand howit  is  that  neither  Australia,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  nor  any  other  region  inhabited  by  quiteuncivilised man, has afforded us a single plant worth culture.
  It is not that these countries, so richin species, do not by a strange chance possess the aboriginal stocks of any useful plants, but that thenative  plants  have  not  been  improved  by  continued  selection  up  to  a  standard  of  perfectioncomparable with that given to the plants in countries anciently civilised.
In  regard  to  the  domestic  animals  kept  by  uncivilised  man,  it  should  not  be  overlooked  that  theyalmost  always  have  to  struggle  for  their  own  food,  at  least  during  certain  seasons.
    And  in  twocountries very differently circumstanced, individuals of the same species, having slightly differentconstitutions or structure, would often succeed better in the one country than in the other, and thusby a process of 'natural selection,' as will hereafter be more fully explained, two sub-breeds mightbe  formed.
    This,  perhaps,  partly  explains  what  has  been  remarked  by  some  authors,  namely,  thatthe  varieties  kept  by  savages  have  more  of  the  character  of  species  than  the  varieties  kept  incivilised countries.
On the view here given of the all-important part which selection by man has played, it becomes atonce obvious, how it is that our domestic races show adaptation in their structure or in their habitsto man's wants or fancies.
  We can, I think, further understand the frequently abnormal character ofour  domestic  races,  and  likewise  their  differences  being  so  great  in  external  characters  andrelatively so slight in internal parts or organs.
  Man can hardly select, or only with much difficulty,any  deviation  of  structure  excepting  such  as  is  externally  visible;  and  indeed  he  rarely  cares  forwhat is internal.
  He can never act by selection, excepting on variations which are first given to himin some slight degree by nature.
  No man would ever try to make a fantail, till he saw a pigeon witha tail developed in some slight degree in an unusual manner, or a pouter till he saw a pigeon with acrop of somewhat unusual size; and the more abnormal or unusual any character was when it firstappeared, the more likely it would be to catch his attention.
  But to use such an expression as tryingto make a fantail, is, I have no doubt, in most cases, utterly incorrect.
  The man who first selected apigeon with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed what the descendants of that pigeon would becomethrough  long-continued,  partly  unconscious  and  partly  methodical  selection.
    Perhaps  the  parentbird of all fantails had only fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded, like the present Java fantail,or  like  individuals  of  other  and  distinct  breeds,  in  which  as  many  as  seventeen  tail-feathers  havebeen  counted.
    Perhaps  the  first  pouter-pigeon  did  not  inflate  its  crop  much  more  than  the  turbitnow does the upper part of its oesophagus,--a habit which is disregarded by all fanciers, as it is notone of the points of the breed.
Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would be necessary to catch the fancier'seye:    he  perceives  extremely  small  differences,  and  it  is  in  human  nature  to  value  any  novelty,however slight, in one's own possession.
  Nor must the value which would formerly be set on anyslight  differences  in  the  individuals  of  the  same  species,  be  judged  of  by  the  value  which  wouldnow be set on them, after several breeds have once fairly been established.
  Many slight differencesmight,  and  indeed  do  now,  arise  amongst  pigeons,  which  are  rejected  as  faults  or  deviations  fromthe  standard  of  perfection  of  each  breed.
    The  common  goose  has  not  given  rise  to  any  markedvarieties;  hence  the  Thoulouse  and  the  common  breed,  which  differ  only  in  colour,  that  mostfleeting of characters, have lately been exhibited as distinct at our poultry-shows.
I think these views further explain what has sometimes been noticed--namely that we know nothingabout the origin or history of any of our domestic breeds.
  But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of alanguage,  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  had  a  definite  origin.
    A  man  preserves  and  breeds  from  anindividual  with  some  slight  deviation  of  structure,  or  takes  more  care  than  usual  in  matching  hisbest animals and thus improves them, and the improved individuals slowly spread in the immediateneighbourhood.
    But  as  yet  they  will  hardly  have  a  distinct  name,  and  from  being  only  slightlyvalued,  their  history  will  be  disregarded.
    When  further  improved  by  the  same  slow  and  gradualprocess, they will spread more widely, and will get recognised as something distinct and valuable,and will then probably first receive a provincial name.
  In semi-civilised countries, with little freecommunication,  the  spreading  and  knowledge  of  any  new  sub-breed  will  be  a  slow  process.
    Assoon  as  the  points  of  value  of  the  new  sub-breed  are  once  fully  acknowledged,  the  principle,  as  Ihave  called  it,  of  unconscious  selection  will  always  tend,--perhaps  more  at  one  period  than  atanother,  as  the  breed  rises  or  falls  in  fashion,--perhaps  more  in  one  district  than  in  another,according to the state of civilisation of the inhabitants--slowly to add to the characteristic featuresof  the  breed,  whatever  they  may  be.
    But  the  chance  will  be  infinitely  small  of  any  record  havingbeen preserved of such slow, varying, and insensible changes.
I  must  now  say  a  few  words  on  the  circumstances,  favourable,  or  the  reverse,  to  man's  power  ofselection.
    A  high  degree  of  variability  is  obviously  favourable,  as  freely  giving  the  materials  forselection  to  work  on;  not  that  mere  individual  differences  are  not  amply  sufficient,  with  extremecare,  to  allow  of  the  accumulation  of  a  large  amount  of  modification  in  almost  any  desireddirection.
    But  as  variations  manifestly  useful  or  pleasing  to  man  appear  only  occasionally,  thechance of their appearance will be much increased by a large number of individuals being kept; andhence  this  comes  to  be  of  the  highest  importance  to  success.
    On  this  principle  Marshall  hasremarked,  with  respect  to  the  sheep  of  parts  of  Yorkshire,  that  'as  they  generally  belong  to  poorpeople, and are mostly in small lots, they never can be improved.
'  On the other hand, nurserymen,from  raising  large  stocks  of  the  same  plants,  are  generally  far  more  successful  than  amateurs  ingetting  new  and  valuable  varieties.
    The  keeping  of  a  large  number  of  individuals  of  a  species  inany country requires that the species should be placed under favourable conditions of life, so as tobreed  freely  in  that  country.
    When  the  individuals  of  any  species  are  scanty,  all  the  individuals,whatever their quality may be, will generally be allowed to breed, and this will effectually preventselection.
    But  probably  the  most  important  point  of  all,  is,  that  the  animal  or  plant  should  be  sohighly  useful  to  man,  or  so  much  valued  by  him,  that  the  closest  attention  should  be  paid  to  eventhe slightest deviation in the qualities or structure of each individual.
  Unless such attention be paidnothing  can  be  effected.
    I  have  seen  it  gravely  remarked,  that  it  was  most  fortunate  that  thestrawberry  began  to  vary  just  when  gardeners  began  to  attend  closely  to  this  plant.
    No  doubt  thestrawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight varieties had been neglected.
  Assoon, however, as gardeners picked out individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit,and raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and bred from them, then,there appeared (aided by some crossing with distinct species) those many admirable varieties of thestrawberry which have been raised during the last thirty or forty years.
In the case of animals with separate sexes, facility in preventing crosses is an important element ofsuccess  in  the  formation  of  new  races,--at  least,  in  a  country  which  is  already  stocked  with  otherraces.
  In this respect enclosure of the land plays a part.
  Wandering savages or the inhabitants ofopen plains rarely possess more than one breed of the same species.
  Pigeons can be mated for life,and this is a great convenience to the fancier, for thus many races may be kept true, though mingledin  the  same  aviary;  and  this  circumstance  must  have  largely  favoured  the  improvement  andformation  of  new  breeds.
    Pigeons,  I  may  add,  can  be  propagated  in  great  numbers  and  at  a  veryquick  rate,  and  inferior  birds  may  be  freely  rejected,  as  when  killed  they  serve  for  food.
    On  theother  hand,  cats,  from  their  nocturnal  rambling  habits,  cannot  be  matched,  and,  although  so  muchvalued by women and children, we hardly ever see a distinct breed kept up; such breeds as we dosometimes see are almost always imported from some other country, often from islands.
  AlthoughI do not doubt that some domestic animals vary less than others, yet the rarity or absence of distinctbreeds of the cat, the donkey, peacock, goose, &c.
, may be attributed in main part to selection nothaving been brought into play:  in cats, from the difficulty in pairing them; in donkeys, from only afew  being  kept  by  poor  people,  and  little  attention  paid  to  their  breeding;  in  peacocks,  from  notbeing  very  easily  reared  and  a  large  stock  not  kept;  in  geese,  from  being  valuable  only  for  twopurposes, food and feathers, and more especially from no pleasure having been felt in the display ofdistinct breeds.
To sum up on the origin of our Domestic Races of animals and plants.
  I believe that the conditionsof life, from their action on the reproductive system, are so far of the highest importance as causingvariability.
    I  do  not  believe  that  variability  is  an  inherent  and  necessary  contingency,  under  allcircumstances, with all organic beings, as some authors have thought.
  The effects of variability aremodified  by  various  degrees  of  inheritance  and  of  reversion.
    Variability  is  governed  by  manyunknown  laws,  more  especially  by  that  of  correlation  of  growth.
    Something  may  be  attributed  tothe  direct  action  of  the  conditions  of  life.
    Something  must  be  attributed  to  use  and  disuse.
    Thefinal result is thus rendered infinitely complex.
  In some cases, I do not doubt that the intercrossingof  species,  aboriginally  distinct,  has  played  an  important  part  in  the  origin  of  our  domesticproductions.
    When  in  any  country  several  domestic  breeds  have  once  been  established,  theiroccasional intercrossing, with the aid of selection, has, no doubt, largely aided in the formation ofnew  sub-breeds;  but  the  importance  of  the  crossing  of  varieties  has,  I  believe,  been  greatlyexaggerated, both in regard to animals and to those plants which are propagated by seed.
  In plantswhich  are  temporarily  propagated  by  cuttings,  buds,  &c.
,  the  importance  of  the  crossing  both  ofdistinct  species  and  of  varieties  is  immense;  for  the  cultivator  here  quite  disregards  the  extremevariability  both  of  hybrids  and  mongrels,  and  the  frequent  sterility  of  hybrids;  but  the  cases  ofplants not propagated by seed are of little importance to us, for their endurance is only temporary.
Over all these causes of Change I am convinced that the accumulative action of Selection, whetherapplied methodically and more quickly, or unconsciously and more slowly, but more efficiently, isby far the predominant Power